Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4894, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
769
Author: Krishna Murari
Bench: Krishna Murari, Aniruddha Bose, Sanjay Kishan Kaul
                                                                                     REP
                                         IN SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 335 OF 2015
         AMAR SINGH                                             ……..         APPELLANT (
                                                       VERSUS
         THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                               ……..         RESPONDENT 
                                                        WITH
                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 336 OF 2015
         INDERJEET SINGH                                        ……..         APPELLANT (
                                                       VERSUS
         THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                               ……..         RESPONDENT 
                                                    JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
These two appeals are directed against the impugned judgment and order dated 09.05.2014 passed
by the High Court1 dismissing the criminal appeal filed by the appellants challenging the order of
conviction against them whereby the appellants were convicted under Section 302 IPC r/w Section
34 IPC. One of the accused– appellant, Inderjeet Singh, was also held guilty and convicted under
Section 27 of the Arms Act and were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and a fine of
Rs.5000/- each, in default of payment to undergo Simple Imprisonment for 3 months.
Accused–appellant, Inderjeet Singh, was also sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for one year
under Section 27 of the Arms Act and this sentence was to run concurrently with the sentence
already awarded to him under Section 302 IPC. 1High Court of Delhi
2. In brief the prosecution case is that on 03.08.1990, on receipt of DD No. 18-A, SI Joginder Singh
along with SI Gian Singh, Constable Jai Singh and Constable Narender Pal reached Sukhdev Market
on the street which goes to Qumayun Restaurant, where near House No. H-801 a crowd was
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
1

gathered and they came to know that injured had been removed to AIIMS in a PCR vehicle. Leaving
Constable Narender Pal at the spot, SI Joginder Singh along with other police officials reached
AIIMS, where he came to know that injured Devinder Singh @ Ladi was declared as ‘brought dead’.
Two brothers of the deceased, namely, Parminder Singh and Amar Singh, were found present in the
hospital. Parminder Singh gave his statement to SI Joginder Singh to the effect that he has six
brothers and his three brothers, namely, Harinder Singh, Ravinder Singh and Rajinder Singh reside
with his mother Smt. Prakash Wati at House No.826/5, Arjun Nagar. His eldest brother Amar Singh
resides at House No.15/88, Geeta Colony along with his family and he along with his family resides
at 53/F, D-12 Area, Sector 4, Bangla Sahib Marg, New Delhi. His sister Saroj resides at 98-A Baba
Kharak Singh Marg along with her family. About three years ago, one person namely Khazan Singh
had been murdered and his brother Devinder Singh @ Ladi had been arrested for his murder and a
case for murder was pending against him. He was released on interim bail from the Court and used
to reside with his sister Saroj. On 3.8.1990 Devinder Singh @ Ladi came to the house of his mother
and his other brother Amar Singh also reached there and they had their meals together. At about
10:00 PM, Parminder Singh along with his brothers, Devinder Singh@ Ladi and Amar Singh left the
house for going to their respective houses. They were moving on foot towards taxi stand situate in
Sukhdev Market. He and Amar Singh were about ten paces ahead of Devinder Singh @ Ladi . At
about 10:10 PM, when they reached near the corner of Sukhdev Market, they heard Devinder Singh
@ Ladi raising an alarm ‘Bachao-Bachao’ and on turning back, they saw that Amar Singh, S/o Likhi
Chand and Shiv Charan, S/o Pooran Chand were giving hockey blows and one Inder Singh, S/o
Khazan Singh was giving knife blows to Devinder Singh @ Ladi. His brother Devinder Singh@ Ladi
fell on the ground and Inderjeet Singh gave him many knife blows. When they tried to rescue their
brother, all the above three accused persons brandished their knife and hockeys and warned that
whosoever will come to save Devinder Singh, they will also kill him. Thereafter all of them ran
towards Bhisham Pitamah Marg, his brother Devinder Singh became unconscious. Many persons
including Sujan Singh, S/o Ram Singh assembled there. After sometime, PCR van came and
removed Devinder Singh to AIIMS, where he was declared dead by the Doctor.
3. On this statement, a case was got registered and investigation was conducted by Inspector
Richpal Singh. During investigation, Inspector got the spot photographed, prepared site plan, seized
one broken piece of hockey, one pair of dirty white shoes, one steel strip, sample blood, blood
stained earth, sample earth from the spot. Inspector also seized the blood stained clothes of Amar
Singh and Parminder Singh, got conducted the post mortem on the dead body of the deceased,
recorded the statement of witnesses and collected the post mortem report. Inspector arrested the
accused persons and recorded the disclosure statement of accused Inderjeet Singh @ Inder, who got
recovered the knife, which was used to commit the murder. Inspector also recorded the disclosure
statements of accused Amar Singh and Shiv Charan, who got recovered the hockeys, used in
commission of offence. The recovered items were sealed separately in pulandas and were sent to
CFSL. After completion of investigation, challan under Section 302/506/34 IPC was filed in the
Court of concerned Metropolitan Magistrate, who committed this case to the Court of Sessions. All
the accused persons pleaded not guilty to the charge framed against them and claimed trial. Accused
Inderjeet Singh was separately charged for an offence under Section 25 and 27 of Arms Act.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
2

4. In order to substantiate its case, prosecution had examined 27 witnesses in all. All the
incriminating evidence was put to the accused persons while recording their statements under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., wherein they totally denied the case of the prosecution.
5. The Trial Court came to the conclusion that the prosecution had brought home the guilt of the
accused persons and accordingly convicted them for murder punishable under Section 302 IPC r/w
Section 34 IPC and sentenced them to Life Imprisonment. Aggrieved by the same, the accused
appellants filed an appeal before the High Court. However, during the pendency of the appeal before
the High Court, appellant Shiv Charan, expired on 12th April, 2008 and accordingly the proceedings
against him were abated.
6. The case set up by the appellants before the High Court was that there was unexplained delay not
only in the lodging of the First Information Report but also in despatching a copy of the same to the
jurisdictional magistrate. In the absence of any cogent and acceptable explanation for the delay, the
prosecution case was rendered doubtful. It was further contended that although prosecution case is
alleged to be based on eye witness on account of the incident, however, Amar Singh PW-11, and
PW-5, did not support the prosecution case and thus it was not safe to rely upon the solitary
evidence of the sole remaining eye witness Parminder Singh PW-1. It was further pleaded that the
conduct of Parminder Singh PW-1 is highly unnatural which makes his presence on the spot at the
time of the incident doubtful. It was pointed out that no effort was made to take his injured brother
to the clinic of Doctor Bhardwaj, which was just nearby. Amar Singh PW-11, who was declared
hostile stated in his evidence that there was darkness at the time of the incident and nobody
recognised the accused persons who have been falsely implicated. It was also contended that
another eye witness Sujan Singh PW-5 has also not supported the prosecution case at all. The
defence also drew the attention of the Court to MLC of the deceased Ex. PW-17/A to show that first
the name of the injured was written as unknown and thereafter the name of Devinder Singh has
been written by overwriting and in the column maintained for recording the name and relation of
who brought the injured, name of Head Constable, Dharam Singh PCR is mentioned and again later
on ‘brothers’ has been added. It was also submitted that the solitary eye witness is a close relation of
a deceased and thus it is not safe to rely upon his sole testimony which is not corroborated.
7. It was further submitted that father of the appellant Inderjeet Singh was murdered and deceased
Devinder Singh was facing trial for the murder and was out on bail and since the victim was accused
of murdering the father of the appellant, the brothers of the deceased victim had clear motive to
falsely implicate the appellants in this case.
8. Arrest of the accused persons and subsequent recovery at their instance was also challenged on
the ground that there is no independent witness to the recovery and police officials are giving
different versions. The defence also pointed out that the knife which was recovered had a blunt tip,
as such, the injuries as mentioned in the post mortem report were not possible to be caused by the
said knife. Even, this knife was not shown to the doctor to seek his opinion whether injuries were
possible by the said blunt knife or not. Recovery of hockey at the instance of the appellant was not
even believed by the Trial Court.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
3

9. However, the High Court finding that the impugned judgment does not suffer from any infirmity
or perversity which calls for interference, dismissed the appeal.
10. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants, learned counsel for the State-Respondent and
learned counsel for the respondent.
11. Shri Dushyant Dave, Learned Senior Counsel for the appellants submitted that the entire
incident appears to be inherently improbable. It is also pointed out that conduct of PW-1 alleged eye
witness either at the time of the incident or immediately thereafter is not natural and does not
inspire confidence which makes his presence on the spot extremely doubtful. The other two eye
witnesses have turned hostile and nothing could be elicited from their cross-examination by the
prosecution. It was further submitted that the conviction and sentence of the appellants based upon
the sole testimony of one eye witness, whose conduct was unnatural and inconsistent with the
ordinary course of human nature making his presence at the site of incident extremely doubtful, is
highly unsafe without corroboration from other piece of evidence.
12. Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State vehemently contended that
two Courts have recorded concurrent finding of guilt of the accused appellants based on the
testimony of an eye witness which they found to be reliable and there exists no legal impediment for
conviction on the basis of the same. She further submitted that evidence of a hostile witness is not to
be discarded as a whole and relevant parts thereof which are admissible in law can be relied upon by
the prosecution. She further submitted that the conviction cannot be assailed merely because of
some lacuna in investigation and any failure or omission of the investigating officer cannot render
the prosecution case doubtful or unworthy of belief, in a case where the prosecution case is fully
established by direct testimony of eye witness duly corroborated by medical evidence.
13. We have considered the rival submissions and carefully perused the record.
14. The prosecution apart from other formal witnesses produced three eye witnesses in support of its
version, namely, Parminder Singh PW-1, Amar Singh PW- 11, the two brothers of the deceased and
Sujan Singh PW-5. PW-11 and PW-5 turned hostile. PW-11 was cross-examined by the prosecution.
He simply denied having seen the accused persons giving blows to his brother. He also denied
having stated to the police that he saw accused appellant Inderjeet Singh inflicting knife blows. He
also denied having stated to the police that he ran to rescue his brother. He also stated that he was
not able to see the faces of the culprits because of the darkness and thus cannot say, if, the accused
persons are the same person, who killed his brother. This alleged eye witness specifically denied
having told the police that the three accused had murdered his brother and he had identified them
as culprits.
15. Similarly, the other eye witness PW-5 produced by the prosecution denied having seen two boys
armed with hockey sticks and one boy holding knife attacking another boy. He also denied having
identified the three accused. He stated that while he was passing outside the house of Doctor
Bhardwaj there were 4-5 persons standing there and it was from them he came to know that person
outside the house of Doctor Bhardwaj was dead. This eye witness also denied having seen the
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
4

incident. He was cross-examined by the prosecution but nothing could be elicited therefrom.
16. Thus the finding of guilt of the two accused appellants recorded by the two Courts below is based
on sole testimony of eye witness PW-1. As a general rule the Court can and may act on the testimony
of single eye witness provided he is wholly reliable. There is no legal impediment in convicting a
person on the sole testimony of a single witness. That is the logic of Section 134 of the Evidence Act,
1872. But if there are doubts about the testimony Courts will insist on corroboration. It is not the
number, the quantity but quality that is material. The time honoured principle is that evidence has
to be weighed and not counted. On this principle stands the edifice of Section 134 of the Evidence
Act. The test is whether the evidence has a ring of truth, is cogent, credible and trustworthy or
otherwise (see Sunil Kumar V/s State Government of NCT of Delhi)2.
17. This case primarily hinges on the testimony of sole eye witness, Parminder Singh PW-1, brother
of the deceased. As already discussed above conviction can be based on the testimony of a single eye
witness so long he is found to be wholly reliable. In the light of the settled legal principles we
proceed to examine the testimony of Parminder Singh PW-1 and also his conduct at the time of the
incident.
18. According to his own testimony on the fateful night at about 10:00 PM, the three brothers
(Parminder Singh PW-1, Amar Singh PW-11 and deceased Devinder Singh @ Ladi) left the Mother’s
house for their respective houses. Parminder Singh and Amar Singh were walking a few paces ahead
of Devinder Singh @ Ladi when they heard him shouting ‘Bachao-Bachao’ when they turned around
they found three persons attacking their brother Devinder Singh @ Ladi. Accused Inderjeet Singh
was armed with a knife while accused Amar Singh and Shiv Charan were armed with hockey sticks.
He further stated that he recognised all the three accused from before and when they try to
intervene all the three persons aimed their weapons at them and threatened to kill. Due to assault
Devinder Singh @ Ladi fell down on the ground and became unconscious and thereafter the accused
persons fled from the place. He also stated that while they were taking care of the injured brother
the police van arrived at the spot in which Devinder Singh @ Ladi was removed to the Hospital
where he was _________________________________
2. (2003) 11 SCC 367.
declared brought dead. During the cross-examination he stated that entire incident barely lasted five
minutes and they did not make any complaint to the police but the police came of its own after about
15 minutes of the incident. He had also admitted in the cross- examination that he did not inform
his mother though she was living nearby. He also stated that he and his brother Amar Singh went to
the Hospital with injured Devinder Singh @ Ladi in the PCR van. He also stated that he informed
the Doctor who examined Devinder Singh @ Ladi as to the manner in which he sustained injuries.
He also stated that Devinder Singh @ Ladi sustained injury on his head on account of hockey blows
however he did not bleed from his head.
19. The unnatural conduct of Parminder Singh PW-1 and Amar Singh PW-11 the two brothers of the
deceased which we have noticed from record is that though they claim to be present at the time of
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
5

occurrence no attempt was made by them to save their brother from assault. Though PW-1 has tried
to explain in his examination in chief that when they tried to intervene and save their brother
Devinder Singh @Ladi all the three accused persons aimed their weapons at them and threatened
that in case they intervened they would also be killed. It may be relevant to notice that Amar Singh
PW-11 neither in statement in chief nor in his cross-examination by the prosecution after being
declared hostile stated about any efforts made either by him or by PW-1 Parminder Singh to save
their brother Devinder Singh @ Ladi when he was attacked. On the contrary PW-11 stated in his
examination in chief that he was not able to run because of his spinal injury. In the
cross-examination he categorically stated that he never told the police that when they tried to rescue
Accused Inderjeet Singh brandished the knife and accused Amar Singh and Shiv Charan brandished
hockey towards them threatening to kill anyone who comes to rescue Devinder Singh @ Ladi. He
also denied in the cross-examination having ever being given any statement to the police that he had
identified the culprits or accused Inderjeet Singh has stabbed with knife and accused Amar Singh
gave hockey blows and the front portion of the hockey had broken because of assault and the 3rd
accused Shiv Charan also gave hockey blows.
20. The assailants were only armed with hockey sticks and a knife and not with any fire arms. It
seems very unnatural that two brothers present on the spot will not even make slightest attempt to
intervene and try to save the other brother being assaulted, merely on the threat extended by the
assailants armed with hockey sticks and a knife. This unnatural conduct totally against natural
human behaviour casts a serious doubt of shadow on the presence of eye witness on the spot at the
time of occurrence. Moreover the facts stated by PW-1 Parminder Singh in this regard, as already
discussed above, has not been corroborated by the other brother Amar Singh PW-11.
21. The other unnatural conduct of two brothers PW-1 and PW-11 just after the incident again makes
their presence on the spot extremely doubtful. There was a medical clinic of Doctor Bhardwaj just
nearby the place of incident and the first endeavour of the two brothers would have been to take
injured brother to the clinic for immediate medical aid or try and get some medical aid fro m the
clinic of Doctor Bhardwaj. Admittedly, according to the statement of Parminder Singh PW-1 PCR
Van arrived after about 15 minutes. During this period no effort was made to either take the injured
brother to the clinic or to call Doctor Bhardwaj for some first aid. This is totally against normal
human behaviour.
22. Further no effort is alleged to have been made to either shift the injured to any hospital or even
inform the police. It is highly unnatural that two real brothers made no efforts to save the life of
third brother who was severely injured if they were present at the place of the incident. The PCR van
is stated to have arrived after 15 minutes on the basis of information given by some unknown person
regarding a person lying injured in front of Qumayun Hotel. PW-20 lady constable Renu in her
evidence stated that on the fateful night she was posted at PCR Van when at about 10:27 PM an
unknown person made a call to inform that one man was lying unconscious near Qumayun Hotel,
Defence Colony which was registered as DD No.-
493. It was on the information given by an unknown, the PCR Van reached at the site of the incident
and shifted the injured to AIIMS where he was declared brought dead.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
6

23. According to the prosecution story the two brothers, namely, Parminder Singh PW-1 and Amar
Singh PW-11 accompanied the injured to the Hospital in the PCR Van and were present during his
medical examination. However, a perusal of the MLC Ex. PW-17/A filed in Volume-II of additional
document goes to show that in the column meant for recording name initially unknown is
mentioned and subsequently Devinder Singh @ ladi has been recorded. Likewise in the column
made for recording the name of relative or friend initially Head Constable ‘Dharam Singh’ is entered
and after recording the words ‘V/C’ V-89 PCR No. 1008/PCR in the second line words ‘and brothers’
appears to have been added.
24. This in itself casts serious doubts of shadow on the prosecution story that two brothers of the
deceased, namely, Parminder Singh PW-1 and Amar Singh PW-11 were present on the spot and
accompanied the injured in PCR Van to AIIMS. Had it been so, naturally, they would have given the
name of the deceased and their own names which would have been recorded in the MLC Ex.
PW-17/A at the first instance. Doctor Romesh Lal PW-17/A who prepared the MLC stated in his
evidence that one dead body was brought in the casualty of AIIMS by Head Constable Dharam Singh
having multiple sharp deep injuries all over the body and he prepared the MLC PW- 17/A.
25. The facts discussed hereinabove makes the presence of eye witness at the place of occurrence all
the more doubtful and highly improbable. Since there are serious doubtful aspects in the conduct of
PW-1 Parminder Singh and his conduct does not appear to be natural it would not be safe to accept
his evidence without corroboration more particularly when two other eye witnesses, one being a real
brother of the deceased has turned hostile.
26. Further, there is material discrepancy between ocular testimony and medical evidence.
Post-Mortem on the dead body of the deceased Devinder Singh @ ladi was conducted by Doctor M.
S. Sagar PW-21. On external examination following anti mortem injuries were noticed:-
1. Multiple contusions and abraded contusions over both forearms, both arms and
dorsum of both hands.
2. CLW on right periauricular region of size 3 cm x 2 cm x 0.5 cm.
3. Contusions right mandibular region extending to neck of size 6 cm x 3 cm.
4. Incised wound on the right side of forehead 1 cm below hairline of size 1.5 x 1 cm
superficial.
5. Incised wound left upper limb vertically placed of size 1.5 x 1 cm x muscle deep
with clean cut inverted margins.
6. Incised wound left knee of size 5 cm x .5 cm x bone deep with clean cut inverted
margins.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
7

7. Incised wound left forearm round elbow of size 1 cm x 1 cm margins clean cut and
everted.
8. Incised wound left forearm placed 6 cm below elbow joint of size 2.5 x lx bone
deep, with clean cut inverted margins, with cut impressions present on the
olecraenon.
9. Incised wound left forearm anterio-medical aspect placed 5 cm below cubital fossa
of size 1.5cm x 1cm x muscle deep with clean cut inverted margins underline
subcutaneous tissue and muscle clean cut.
10. Incised wound right side of abdomen placed 10 cm below coastal margins in mid
axillary plane 3 cm x 1 cm into muscle deep obliquely placed, margins clean cut, not
penetrating the abdominal cavity.
11. Stab wound right side of chest anterior axillary plane obliquely placed of size 3.5
cm x 1 cm, 22 cm below cavicular with clean cut everted margins passing through 7th
intercoastal plane entering into left lower lobe of lung going into pericardium with
presence of hemo-
pericardium and incised wound left pentricle around apex of size 2 cm x 1.5 cm x whole thickness of
ventricle.
12. Stab wound of size 4 cm x 1 cm x skin deep placed transversely 8 cm below injury no. 11.
13. Incised wound 1 cm x 1 cm with clean cut inverted margins placed 2 cm lateral and 1.5 cm below
injury no. 12.
14. Stab wound left side of abdomen in posterior axillary line placed 25 cm below clavicular margins
of size 4 cm x 1 cm going into abdominal cavity producing multiple incised wound of small and large
intestines.
15. Incised wound of size 4 cm x 1.5 cm in left side of abdomen 6 cm below and 2 cm medial to injury
no. 14.
Internal examination of the deceased revealed:-
There were homo-thorax on left side with about 500 cc of blood being present. There
was stab wound of left lung lower lobe of size 3 cm x 1.5 cm x 4 cm. Hemo-cardium
was also present with 400 cc of blood and blood clots. There was stab wound of heart
over apex of size 2.5 cm x 1 cm x whole thickness of left ventricular wall with cutting
of cordae- tendenae. In the abdominal cavity, there was hemo-periteneum about 400
cc of blood and blood clots with multiple incised wound of small and large intestines.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
8

It was opined that cause of death was shock as a result of multiple antemortem injuries produced by
sharp edged weapon.
Injury no.11 and 14 are sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature individually as well
as collectively.
27. Thus, there are total 15 injuries inflicted by three assailants, two having hockey sticks and one
knife as per prosecution story. Parminder Singh PW-1 emphatically stated that whole incident
barely lasted five minutes. It would be practically impossible to inflict 15 injuries of the type by three
assailants simultaneously attacking the deceased within a short span of 5 minutes particularly when
the victim being a normal healthy person naturally must have offered resistance. Inflicting 15
injuries on the body of the deceased by three accused persons would require a considerable amount
of time. This itself suggest that three accused had sufficient time at their disposal to conduct the
crime and the entire incident could not have taken place within five minutes as stated by eye witness
Parminder Singh PW-1. This fact coupled with the fact that two brothers of the deceased remained a
mute spectator when the third brother was being assaulted is clear indication of the fact that PW-1
Parminder Singh was not present on the spot and not an eye witness of the incident.
28. Dr. M.S. Sagar in his Post-Mortem report has opined that the cause of death was due to shock
due to multiple ante mortem injuries caused by sharp edged weapon and injuries No. 11 and 14 were
individually and collectively sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of nature. He further opined
in his statement that injuries have been caused by sharp edged weapon and since no weapon was
shown to him, he has not given any opinion. Admittedly the tip of knife which was recovered on the
disclosure statement of accused appellant Inderjeet Singh was broken and it was not pointed but
blunt. Whether the type of stab and incised wound found on the body of the deceased could have
been inflicted by a knife with a broken tip, is in our opinion, extremely doubtful. The opinion of the
Doctor has not been obtained as to whether such injuries could have been caused by knife with a
broken tip by showing him the same.
29. In the facts and circumstances of the case this was serious lapse on the part of the investigating
officer. Though normally minor lapses on the part of the investigating officer should not come in the
way of accepting eye witness account, if otherwise reliable. But in the circumstances of the case at
hands where the conduct of sole eye witness is unnatural and there are various other surrounding
circumstances which make his presence at the site of incident doubtful, such a lapse on the part of
the investigating officer assumed significance and is not liable to ignored.
30. While emphasizing the importance of eliciting the opinion of medical witness in such
circumstances this Court in the case of Kartarey and Ors. V/s State of U.P.3 ________________
3. (1976) 1 SCC 172.
has observed as under:-
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
9

“We take this opportunity of emphasizing the importance of eliciting the opinion of
the medical witness, who had examined the injuries of the victim, more specifically
on this point, for the proper administration of justice particularly in a case where
injuries found are forensically of the same species, example stab wound, and the
problem before of the Court is whether all or any those injuries could be caused with
one or more than one weapon. It is the duty of the prosecution, and no less of the
Court, to see that the alleged weapon of the offence, if available, is shown to the
medical witness and his opinion invited as to whether all or any of the injuries on the
victim could be caused with that weapon. Failure to do so may sometimes, cause
aberration of the course of justice”.
31. The same has been again asserted by this Court in Ishwar Singh V/s State of U.P.4
by observing as under:-
“It is the duty of the prosecution, and no less of the Court, to see that the alleged
weapons of the offence, if available, is shown to the medical witness and is opinion
invited as to whether all or any of the injuries on the victim could be caused with that
weapon. Failure to do so sometimes, cause aberration of the course of justice. On the
basis of the evidence on record it is difficult to say whether the injury to the deceased
was caused by the knife with a broken tip which was ceased. These variations relate to
vital parts of the prosecution case, and cannot be dismissed as minor discrepancies.
In such a case, the evidence of the eye witness “cannot be accepted at its face value”,
as observed by this Court in Mitter Sen and others V/s State of U.P.”5
32. The conviction of the appellants rests on the oral testimony of PW-1 who was
produced as eye witness of the murder of the deceased. Both the Learned Sessions
Judge, as well as High Court have placed reliance on the evidence of PW-1 and
_________________
4. (1976) 4 SCC 355.
5. (1976) 1 SCC 723 ordinarily this Court could be reluctant to disturb the concurrent view but since
there are inherent improbabilities in the prosecution story and the conduct of eye witness is
inconsistent with ordinary course of human nature we do not think it would be safe to convict the
appellants upon the incorroborated testimony of the sole eye witness. Similar view has been taken
by a Three Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Selvaraj V/s The State of Tamil Nadu6. Wherein
on an appreciation of evidence the prosecution story was found highly improbable and inconsistent
of ordinary course of human nature concurrent findings of guilt recorded by the two Courts below
was set aside.
33. On the facts of the present case it can be said without hesitation that prosecution has miserably
failed to prove the alleged offences beyond doubt by adducing cogent and trustworthy evidence.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
10

34. In view of the forgoing discussions, we are not able to appreciate the reason given by the Courts
below for convicting the appellants for the alleged offences. On the contrary, we are of the
considered view that prosecution has failed to establish the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
doubt. The incident does not appear to have happened in the manner in which the prosecution
wants the Court to believe it had happened.
________________
6. (1976) 4 SCC 343
35. Since, the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond doubt the
appellants therefore must be given benefit of doubt. In the circumstances, we set aside the
impugned orders of the Courts below and allow these appeals. The appellants are directed to be
released forthwith unless required in any other case.
............................................J. (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL) ............................................J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE) ...........................................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 12, 2020.
Amar Singh vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108586555/
11
