Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on
13 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4971, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
772
Author: Ashok Bhushan
Bench: Ashok Bhushan, R. Subhash Reddy, M.R. Shah
                                                                              1
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).3419 of 2020
                             (Arising out of SLP(C)No.10255 of 2020)
         ANIL BHARDWAJ                                        APPELLANT(S)
                                              VERSUS
         THE HON’BLE HIGH COURT OF
         MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                               RESPONDENT(S)
                                          J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
Leave granted.
2. This appeal has been filed questioning the Division Bench judgment dated 06.01.2020 of the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant. The appellant in the
writ petition has prayed for quashing the orders dated 14.09.2018, 18.07.2018 and 21.09.2019 by
which appellant has been held not suitable for being appointed to the post of District Judge (Entry
Level).
3. The brief facts of the case are:
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
1

The High Court of Madhya Pradesh issued an advertisement dated 09.03.2017
inviting applications for recruitment in the post of District Judge(Entry Level) in the
cadre of Higher Judicial Service by Direct Recruitment from amongst the eligible
Advocates.
In pursuance to the advertisement, the appellant submitted online application form. The appellant
after being declared successful in the Main Examination was called for interview. The provisional
select and waiting list was published in which the name of the appellant was included at Serial No.13
in the category of unreserved. The appellant received a communication on 06.04.2018 from the Law
and Legislative Department informing that he has been selected for the post of District Judge (Entry
Level). He was asked to appear before the Medical Board for the health tests. On 02.07.2018 the
appellant was informed that in his attestation form FIR No.852/2014 under Section 498/406/34
IPC is shown and the copy of the same was asked for. On 14.09.2018 order was issued by the
Principal Secretary, Madhya Pradesh, Law and Legislative Department declaring the appellant
ineligible and directing for deletion the name of the appellant from the select list. The Government
also issued a Gazette notification deleting the name of the appellant from the Merit No.13 of the
main select list.
4. The appellant filed a Writ Petition No.27434 of 2018 before the High Court challenging the order
dated 14.09.2018 and the Gazette notification dated 21.09.2018. On application submitted under
the Right to Information Act, the appellant was provided extract of the Minutes of the Joint Meeting
of Administrative Committee (Higher Judicial Service) and Examination- cum-Selection and
Appointment Committee dated 18.07.2018 by which proceedings the appellant was not considered
suitable for being appointed to the post of District Judge (Entry Level). On the basis of a complaint
by the wife of the appellant, a criminal case was registered and vide judgment dated 18.09.2019 the
appellant was acquitted of the charge framed against him.
5. The appellant filed an application for amendment of the writ petition to bring on record the order
of the acquittal and other events occurred during the pendency of the writ petition. The appellant
was permitted to withdraw his earlier writ petition with liberty to file a fresh writ petition. Writ
Petition No.27779 of 2019 was filed by the appellant incorporating subsequent events, facts and
acquittal order which writ petition has been dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 06.01.2020
by the High Court. Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the appellant has come up in this appeal.
6. We have heard Shri R. Venkataramani, learned senior counsel for the appellant.
7. Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the appellant in his online application form
has disclosed about the lodging of FIR No.852/2014 under Section 498A/406/34 IPC. He submits
that appellant having disclosed the lodging of FIR against him has not concealed any fact before the
High Court and he having been selected on merit was entitled to be appointed. Shri Venkataramani
submits that on the subsequent acquittal of the appellant on 18.09.2019 his case for appointment
was to be reconsidered by the High Court and the High Court committed an error in not considering
the appellant for appointment. The candidature of the appellant could not have been cancelled
merely on the ground of pendency of criminal case. The appellant could not have been deprived of
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
2

the employment after acquittal. There was no other material on record to indicate that antecedent or
conduct of the appellant was not upto the mark. The High Court ought to have sent the matter back
before the Higher Judicial Service and Examination-cum-Selection Committee for reconsideration.
8. Learned counsel for the appellant has referred to the judgments of this Court which have been
relied by the High Court in the impugned judgment. Learned counsel for appellant has also placed
reliance on the judgment of this Court in Mohammed Imran vs. State of Maharashtra and others
(C.A.No.10571 of 2018) decided on 12.10.2018. He submits that the judgment of Mohammed Imran
was also a case of a judicial officer who was directed by this Court to be given appointment.
9. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
records.
10. The present is not a case where the name of the appellant was deleted in the select list on the
ground of any concealment of criminal case against him. The appellant has brought on the record
the proceedings of Examination-cum-Selection Committee dated 18.07.2018. At Item No.2 of the
Agenda the Committee recorded the following decision:
“ITEM NO.02.Consideration on the matter relates to Character Verification Reports
of selected 13 candidates of MPHJS (District Judge-Entry Level) (Direct from Bar)
Exam-2016 & 2017, received from Law Department, Bhopal for determination of
their eligibility for the said post.
1.Shri Anil Bhardwaj:-
Attestation Form submitted Shri Anil Bhardwaj and police verification report
submitted by Deputy Commissioner of Police, Special Branch, New Delhi, goes to
show that FIR 852/2014 under Section 498A/406/34 of IPC has been registered
against Shri Anil Bhardwaj on the basis of complaint filed by Smt. Pooja wife of Shri
Anil Bhardwaj. After due consideration resolved that a case against Shri Anil
Bhardwaj under Section 498A, 406-34 IPC is still pending before Rohini Court, New
Delhi. Therefore, he is not considered suitable for being appointed to the post of
District Judge (Entry Level).”
10. The FIR against the appellant was lodged by his wife under Section 498A and 406
IPC in the year 2014 on the basis of which a charge-sheet was submitted in the Court
on 15.07.2017 under Section 498A and 406 IPC. The appellant has disclosed lodging
of the FIR against him in his online application form. The name of the appellant was
included in the select list which was forwarded to the State. The State after character
verification submitted a report which report was considered on 18.07.2018 by the
Administrative Committee (Higher Judicial Service) and Examination-
cum-Selection and Appointment Committee and a resolution was taken that due to pendency of the
case under Section 498A, 406-34 IPC on the basis of complaint filed by the wife, Smt. Pooja, the
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
3

appellant is not considered suitable for being appointed to the post of District Judge.
11. Before the High Court, the decision of the Committee dated 18.07.2018 as well as the order of the
State dated 14.09.2018 for deleting the name of the appellant was challenged in the writ petition.
The main issue to be considered was as to whether resolution dated 18.07.2018 suffered from error
which requires judicial review by the High Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226. The
submission which has been pressed by the counsel for the appellant is that appellant’s case was
required to be reconsidered in view of his subsequent acquittal on 18.09.2019.
12. The recruitment to the Judicial Service is governed by the provisions of Madhya Pradesh
Uchchatar Nyayik Seva (Bharti Tatha Seva Sharten) Niyam, 1994. This Court issued direction to all
States to fill up the vacancies in subordinate Courts in a time schedule. The direction was issued by
this Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) and another vs. Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission and
others, 2008(17) SCC 703. The selection process for filling up the post of District Judge has to be
completed by all the High Courts as per the time schedule fixed by this Court. After declaration of
the merit list the candidates have to be given appointments in time bound manner so that they may
join the respective posts. There is no dispute that on the date when the Committee declared the
appellant unsuitable, criminal case against him under Section 498A and 406 IPC was pending which
was registered on a complaint filed by the appellant’s wife, Smt. Pooja. The mere inclusion in the
select list does not give an indefeasible right to a candidate. The employer has right to refuse
appointment to the candidate included in the select list on any valid ground. The persons who
occupy Judicial Service of the State are persons who are expected to have impeccable character and
conduct. It is not disputed that the criminal case under Section 498A and 406 IPC was pending at
the time when the appellant applied for the recruitment, when he appeared for the interview and
when the result was declared. The character verification report was received from the State where
pendency of the criminal case was mentioned which was the reason for the Committee to declare the
appellant unsuitable. The submission which needs to be considered is that whether in view of the
subsequent acquittal of the appellant, his case was required to be reconsidered and he was entitled
to be appointed.
13. This Court in Commissioner of Police, New Delhi and another vs. Mehar Singh, (2013) 7 SCC
685, while considering a case of antecedents verification for appointment into Delhi Police Service
made the following observation in paragraph 35:
“35. The police force is a disciplined force. It shoulders the great responsibility of
maintaining law and order and public order in the society. People repose great faith
and confidence in it. It must be worthy of that confidence. A candidate wishing to join
the police force must be a person of utmost rectitude. He must have impeccable
character and integrity. A person having criminal antecedents will not fit in this
category. Even if he is acquitted or discharged in the criminal case, that acquittal or
discharge order will have to be examined to see whether he has been completely
exonerated in the case because even a possibility of his taking to the life of crimes
poses a threat to the discipline of the police force.…………”
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
4

14. The observation was made by this Court in the above case that a candidate wishing to join the
police force must be a person having impeccable character and integrity. The above observations
apply with greater force to the Judicial Service. This Court further observed that even in the case of
acquittal, it has to be examined as to whether the person was completely exonerated in the case or
not. In the present case the acquittal having taken place after the close of recruitment process, there
was no question of examining the acquittal order by the High Court at the time of finalizing the
selection process.
15. Learned counsel for the appellant has referred to the judgment of this Court in Joginder Singh
vs. Union Territory of Chandigarh and others, (2015) 2 SCC 377, which was a case whether the
appellant was acquitted by the trial court for a case under Section 148/149/323/325/307 IPC. In the
above case acquittal took place even before the appellant was called for the interview/medical
examination. This fact was recorded in paragraph 24 of the judgment in the following words:
“24. However, in the present case, we have observed that the appellant was involved
in a family feud and the FIR came to be lodged against him on 14-4-1998, after he
had applied for the post of Constable. Further, he had been acquitted on 4-10-1999
i.e. much before he was called for the interview/medical examination/written
test………”
16. The above case is clearly distinguishable and does not help the appellant.
17. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh vs. Union of India and others, (2016) 8 SCC
471, had occasion to examine different aspects of verification form after selection including the
question of having criminal antecedents and pending of criminal case. This Court laid down that in
the event criminal case is pending and incumbent has not been acquitted employer may well be
justified in not appointing such an incumbent. In paragraph 32 following has been laid down:
“32. No doubt about it that once verification form requires certain information to be
furnished, declarant is duty-bound to furnish it correctly and any suppression of
material facts or submitting false information, may by itself lead to termination of his
services or cancellation of candidature in an appropriate case. However, in a criminal
case incumbent has not been acquitted and case is pending trial, employer may well
be justified in not appointing such an incumbent or in terminating the services as
conviction ultimately may render him unsuitable for job and employer is not
supposed to wait till outcome of criminal case. In such a case non- disclosure or
submitting false information would assume significance and that by itself may be
ground for employer to cancel candidature or to terminate services.”
18. Even in a case where candidates have been acquitted in criminal case, it was held that the
decision of the Screening Committee being not actuated by mala fide regarding suitability of the
candidate is to be respected. This Court in Union Territory, Chandigarh Administration and others
vs. Pradeep Kumar and another, (2018) 1 SCC 797, laid down following in paragraphs 13 and 17:
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
5

“13. It is thus well settled that acquittal in a criminal case does not automatically
entitle him for appointment to the post. Still it is open to the employer to consider the
antecedents and examine whether he is suitable for appointment to the post. From
the observations of this Court in Mehar Singh, 2013 (7) SCC 685 and Parvez Khan,
2015 (2) SCC 591 cases, it is clear that a candidate to be recruited to the police service
must be of impeccable character and integrity. A person having criminal antecedents
will not fit in this category. Even if he is acquitted or discharged, it cannot be
presumed that he was honourably acquitted/completely exonerated. The decision of
the Screening Committee must be taken as final unless it is shown to be mala fide.
The Screening Committee also must be alive to the importance of the trust reposed in
it and must examine the candidate with utmost character.
17. In a catena of judgments, the importance of integrity and high standard of conduct in police
force has been emphasised. As held in Mehar Singh case5, the decision of the Screening Committee
must be taken as final unless it is mala fide. In the case in hand, there is nothing to suggest that the
decision of the Screening Committee is mala fide. The decision of the Screening Committee that the
respondents are not suitable for being appointed to the post of Constable does not call for
interference. The Tribunal and the High Court, in our view, erred in setting aside the decision of the
Screening Committee and the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.”
19. Now, we may notice the judgment of Mohammed Imran (supra) which has been heavily relied by
the learned counsel for the appellant. In the above case the appellant was selected for Judicial
Service whose selection was cancelled on 04.06.2010 due to the character verification report of the
Police. Writ petition was dismissed by the High Court. It was contended before this court that the
appellant was acquitted of the charge under Sections 363, 366, 34 IPC on 28.10.2004 that is much
before he cleared the examination for appointment in the year 2009. The appellant disclosed his
prosecution and acquittal by the Sessions Court. This Court noticed the aforesaid fact in paragraph 9
of the judgment in the following words:
“9. It is an undisputed fact that one Shri Sudhir Gulabrao Barde, who had been
acquitted on 24.11.2009 in Case No.3022 of 2007 under Sections 294, 504, 34 IPC,
has been appointed……”
20. This Court held that report received reveals that except for the criminal case, in which he had
already been acquitted, the appellant has a clean record and there is no adverse material against him
to deny him the fruits of his academic labour. This Court found decision rejecting the candidature of
the appellant as untenable by making following observation in paragraph 11:
“11. In the entirety of the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the considered
opinion that the consideration of the candidature of the appellant and its rejection
are afflicted by a myopic vision, blurred by the spectacle of what has been described
as moral turpitude, reflecting inadequate appreciation and application of facts also,
as justice may demand.”
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
6

21. There can be no dispute that in event it is found that decision by which the candidature of a
candidate is rejected is arbitrary or actuated by malafide such decision can be interfered by the
Constitutional Courts. We have already noticed the judgment of this Court in Union Territory,
Chandigarh Administration and others vs. Pradeep Kumar and another (supra) that the decision of
the Screening Committee must be final unless it is mala fide.
22. There can be no dispute to the above preposition. But there can be other valid reasons for not
sustaining the decision of Screening Committee/ Selection Committee apart from the ground of
mala fide. Any arbitrary decision taken by the Selection Committee can very well be interfered by
the Constitutional Courts in exercise of Judicial Review Jurisdiction.
23. Reverting to the facts of the present case, the decision of Examination-cum-Section and
Appointment Committee for holding the appellant unsuitable was based on the relevant
consideration, i.e., a criminal case against the appellant under Section 498A/406/34 IPC was
pending consideration which was registered on a complaint filed by the wife of the appellant. Such
decision of the Committee was well within the jurisdiction and power of the Committee and cannot
be said to be unsustainable. The mere fact that subsequently after more than a year when the person
whose candidature has been cancelled has been acquitted cannot be a ground to turn the clock
backward.
24. There being no infirmity in the decision dated 18.07.2018 of the Committee declaring the
appellant unsuitable for the post and consequential decision taken by the State to delete the name of
the appellant, the High Court did not commit any error in dismissing the writ petition. The fact that
subsequently the appellant was acquitted in the criminal case did not furnish sufficient ground for
reconsidering the appellant for appointment on the post.
25. One more submission advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner needs also to be
considered. The petitioner’s contention is that the decision declaring the petitioner unsuitable on
the ground of pendency of criminal case under Section 498A, 406 IPC was contrary to the guidelines
issued by the Government of Madhya Pradesh for character verification dated 05.06.2003. He
submits that as per paragraph 6(viii) of the guidelines on the acquittal on merit of the case by the
Court, the candidate will be eligible for Government service. He submits that the above clause of the
Government Order has been breached in declaring the appellant unsuitable.
26. The guidelines dated 05.06.2003 has been issued by Government of Madhya Pradesh on the
subject “regarding issuing of new guidelines for character verification.” Paragraph 6 which has been
relied by the counsel for the appellant is regarding column 12 of the Attestation form. It is useful to
extract paragraph 6 and clause
(viii) which are as follows: -
“6. The Column 12 of the attestation form filled for character verification by selected
candidates for government service, criminal background, judicial case and the
information about acquittal or conviction in it, willfully or erroneously or ignorantly
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
7

kept vacant subject to qualification for appointment in government service taking
into consideration the policy as per rules by the state government with immediate
effect decisions have been taken.
(i)……… ………… …………… ………… ………… ……………
(viii) On the acquittal on merit of the case by the Hon’ble Court, the candidate will be
eligible for government service.”
27. Clause (viii) on which the reliance is placed contemplates that the candidate who has been
acquitted on merit by the Court will be eligible for the Government service. The aforesaid
contemplation relates to at the time of character verification. Thus, at the time of character
verification, if a candidate is found to be acquitted on merits by the Court, the candidate shall be
treated to be eligible for Government Service. The above clause (viii) as quoted above cannot come
to the rescue of the appellant who at the time of character verification or at the time of consideration
of the case of the appellant by the committee on 18.07.2018 had not been acquitted. Had the
appellant in column 12 had mentioned about the acquittal or at the time of character verification it
was found that the candidate has been acquitted on merit by the Court, Clause 6(viii) would have
been attracted but in the present case the said clause is not attracted since at the time of character
verification the appellant had not been acquitted and he was acquitted after more than a year from
rejection of his candidature.
28. Learned counsel for the appellant lastly has contended that due to deletion of the name of
appellant from select list a stigma is attached to him, for removal of which this Court may issue
notice in this SLP. As noted above, the appellant having already been acquitted by the judgment
dated 18.09.2019 stigma of criminal case has already washed out and the criminal case having
resulted in acquittal no stigma is attached to the appellant’s name on the above ground. The
apprehension of the learned counsel for the appellant that a stigma shall continue with the name of
the appellant is misconceived, stigma, if any, is already over by acquittal.
29. We, thus, are of the view that the High Court did not commit any error in dismissing the writ
petition. The appellant was not entitled for any relief in the writ petition. In the result, while
dismissing this appeal we observe that stigma, if any, of the criminal case lodged against appellant
under Section 498A/406/34 IPC is washed out due to the acquittal of the appellant vide judgment
dated 18.09.2019.
......................J. [ASHOK BHUSHAN] ......................J. [M.R. SHAH] NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 13, 2020.
Anil Bhardwaj vs The Honble High Court Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32638816/
8
