Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1175, 2020 (2) AJR 275,
AIRONLINE 2020 SC 259, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1175 (2020) 4 SCALE
419, (2020) 4 SCALE 419
Author: Deepak Gupta
Bench: Deepak Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 190 OF 2018
          ARUN KUMAR GUPTA                                           …PETITIONER(S)
                                                  Versus
          STATE OF JHARKHAND & ANR.                                …RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 391 OF 2018
                                            JUDGMENT
Deepak Gupta, J.
1. These writ petitions have been filed by two erstwhile judicial officers who were members of the
judicial service in the State of Jharkhand and are directed against the orders whereby they have
been compulsorily retired. In respect of the two writ petitions which are the subject matter of this
judgment, this Court passed the following order on 06.09.2018:
“Writ Petition Nos. 190/2018 and 391/2018 shall remain pending. The High Court of
Jharkhand may like to reconsider the matter in the light of the entirety of the
materials that have been placed before us at the hearing by the Registrar General of
the Jharkhand High Court and also by the learned counsel for the High Court.
We make it clear that the High Court is free to decide the matter as may be
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
1

considered appropriate and that we have expressed no opinion on merits at this
stage. The High Court of Jharkhand would be free to support its conclusions in terms
of the present order with adequate reasons.
The decision of the High Court in accordance with this order be laid before us at the
end of two months from today.
List the matters after two months.” Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the matters were
placed before the Screening Committee of the High Court of Jharkhand and the
Screening Committee on 11.10.2018 again found sufficient reasons and approved the
earlier action taken to compulsorily retire these officers. The resolution of the
Screening Committee was placed before the Standing Committee of the Jharkhand
High Court, which approved the resolution of the screening committee on
25.10.2018.
2. Challenge is laid in both these writ petitions to the orders of compulsory retirement and especially
to the reasons assigned or the material ignored by the Screening Committee. The orders of
compulsory retirement have been passed in terms of the Rule 74(b)(ii) of the Jharkhand Service
Code, 2001 which reads as follows:
“(ii) The appointing authority concerned may after giving a Government servant
atleast three month’s previous notice in writing, or an equal amount to three month’s
pay and allowance in lieu of such notice, require him in public interest to retire from
the service on the date on which such a Government servant completes thirty years of
qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified
in the notice” The aforesaid rule is pari materia to Rule 56(j) of the Fundamental
Rules.
3. The main contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners are that their retirement is not in the
pubic interest: their entire service record especially the contemporaneous record has not been taken
into consideration and also that the petitioners have been granted various promotions which would
have the effect of washing off their previous adverse entries, if any.
4. While deciding the present case we are conscious of the fact that we are dealing with the cases of
judicial officers. The standard of integrity and probity expected from judicial officers is much higher
than that expected from other officers. Keeping these factors in mind we shall first discuss the law
on the subject and then take up these two cases on merits.
Principles Governing Compulsory Retirement
5. This Court in Union of India v. Col. J.N. Sinha1 held that compulsory retirement does not involve
civil consequences. It also dealt with the issue of what constitutes public interest. The following
observations are apposite:
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
2

“9. Now coming to the express words of Fundamental Rule 56(j) it says that the
appropriate authority has the absolute right to retire a Government servant if it is of
the opinion that it is in the public interest to do so. The right conferred on the
appropriate authority is an absolute one. That power can be exercised subject to the
conditions mentioned in the rule, one of which is that the concerned authority must
be of the opinion that it is in public interest to do so. If that authority bona fide forms
that opinion, the correctness of that opinion cannot be challenged before courts. It is
open to an aggrieved party to contend that the requisite opinion has not been formed
or the decision is based on collateral grounds or that it is an arbitrary decision. The
1st respondent challenged the opinion formed by the Government on the ground of
mala fide. But that ground has failed. The High Court did not accept that plea. The
same was not pressed before us. The impugned order was not attacked on the ground
that the required opinion was not formed or that the opinion formed was an arbitrary
one. One of the conditions of the 1st respondent’s service is that the Government can
choose to retire him any time after he completes fifty years if it thinks that it is in
public interest to do so. Because of his compulsory retirement he does not lose any of
the rights 1 (1970) 2 SCC 458 acquired by him before retirement. Compulsory
retirement involves no civil consequences. The aforementioned Rule 56(j) is not
intended for taking any penal action against the Government servants. That rule
merely embodies one of the facets of the pleasure doctrine embodied in Article 310 of
the Constitution. Various considerations may weigh with the appropriate authority
while exercising the power conferred under the rule. In some cases, the Government
may feel that a particular post may be more usefully held in public interest by an
officer more competent than the one who is holding. It may be that the officer who is
holding the post is not inefficient but the appropriate authority may prefer to have a
more efficient officer. It may further be that in certain key posts public interest may
require that a person of undoubted ability and integrity should be there.
There is no denying the fact that in all organizations and more so in Government organizations,
there is good deal of dead wood. It is in public interest to chop off the same. Fundamental Rule 56(j)
holds the balance between the rights of the individual Government servant and the interests of the
public. While a minimum service is guaranteed to the Government servant, the Government is given
power to energise its machinery and make it more efficient by compulsorily retiring those who in its
opinion should not be there in public interest.
xxx xxx xxx
11. In our opinion the High Court erred in thinking that the compulsory retirement involves civil
consequences. Such a retirement does not take away any of the rights that have accrued to the
Government servant because of his past service. It cannot be said that if the retiring age of all or a
section of the Government servants is fixed at 50 years, the same would involve civil consequences.
Under the existing system there is no uniform retirement age for all Government servants. The
retirement age is fixed not merely on the basis of the interest of the Government servant but also
depending on the requirements of the society.” (emphasis supplied) This judgment was followed in
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
3

State of Gujarat v. Suryakant Chunilal Shah2, wherein this Court dealt with the concept of public
interest in great detail.
6. A three−Judge Bench in Baikuntha Nath Das v. Chief Distt. Medical Officer3 dealing with the
concept of compulsory retirement laid down the following principles:
“34. The following principles emerge from the above discussion:
(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment. It implies no stigma nor
any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the government on forming the opinion that it is in
the public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily. The order is passed
on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of
compulsory retirement. This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded
altogether. While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an
appellate court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a)
mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is arbitrary — in the sense
that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in
short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to
consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter — of
course attaching more importance to record of and performance during 2 (1999) 1
SCC 529 3 (1992) 2 SCC 299 the later years. The record to be so considered would
naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both
favourable and adverse. If a government servant is promoted to a higher post
notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so, if the
promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing
that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration. That
circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference.
Interference is permissible only on the grounds mentioned in (iii) above. This aspect has been
discussed in paras 30 to 32 above.”
7. In Chandra Singh v. State of Rajasthan4, though this Court came to the conclusion that the
compulsory retirement awarded to the applicant was not in consonance with the law, it did not give
relief to the petitioner on the ground that even under Article 235 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court can assess the performance of any judicial officer at any time with a view to discipline
the black sheep or weed out the dead wood. This Court held that this constitutional power of the
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
4

High Court is not circumscribed by any rule. Reference may be made to paras 40 and 47 of the
judgment:
“40. Article 235 of the Constitution of India enables the High Court to assess the
performance of any 4 (2003) 6 SCC 545 judicial officer at any time with a view to
discipline the black sheep or weed out the deadwood. This constitutional power of the
High Court cannot be circumscribed by any rule or order.
xxx xxx xxx
47. In the instant case, we are dealing with the higher judicial officers. We have
already noticed the observations made by the Committee of three Judges. The nature
of judicial service is such that it cannot afford to suffer continuance in service of
persons of doubtful integrity or who have lost their utility.”
8. In Syed T.A. Naqshbandi v. State of J & K,5, this Court held that while exercising powers of
judicial review the Courts should not substitute themselves for the Committee/Full Court of the
High Court. The following observations are pertinent:
“10…Neither the High Court nor this Court, in exercise of its powers of judicial
review, could or would at any rate substitute themselves in the place of the
Committee/Full Court of the High Court concerned, to make an independent
reassessment of the same, as if sitting on an appeal. On a careful consideration of the
entire materials brought to our notice by learned counsel on either side, we are
satisfied that the evaluation made by the Committee/Full Court forming their
unanimous opinion is neither so arbitrary or capricious nor can be said to be so
irrational as to shock the conscience of the Court to warrant or justify any
interference. In cases of such assessment, evaluation and formulation of opinions, a
vast range of multiple factors play a vital and important role and no one factor should
be allowed to be overblown out of proportion either to decry or deify an issue to be
resolved or claims sought to be considered or asserted. In the very nature of things it
would be 5 (2003) 9 SCC 592 difficult, nearing almost an impossibility to subject
such exercise undertaken by the Full Court, to judicial review except in an
extraordinary case when the Court is convinced that some monstrous thing which
ought not to have taken place has really happened and not merely because there
could be another possible view or someone has some grievance about the exercise
undertaken by the Committee/Full Court…”
9. In Pyare Mohan Lal v. State of Jharkhand6, dealing with a case of judicial officers, this Court in
relation to the powers under the same rule, after referring to a number of judgments, summarised
the law on the point as follows:
“18. Thus, the law on the point can be summarised to the effect that an order of
compulsory retirement is not a punishment and it does not imply stigma unless such
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
5

order is passed to impose a punishment for a proved misconduct, as prescribed in the
statutory rules. [See Surender Kumar v. Union of India] [(2010) 1 SCC 158]. The
Authority must consider and examine the overall effect of the entries of the officer
concerned and not an isolated entry, as it may well be in some cases that in spite of
satisfactory performance, the authority may desire to compulsorily retire an
employee in public interest, as in the opinion of the said Authority, the post has to be
manned by a more efficient and dynamic person and if there is sufficient material on
record to show that the employee “rendered himself a liability to the institution”,
there is no occasion for the court to interfere in the exercise of its limited power of
judicial review.” 6 (2010) 10 SCC 693
10. In Rajendra Singh Verma v. Lt. Governor (NCT of Delhi) , this Court was dealing with the
compulsory retirement of a judicial officer from the Delhi Higher Judicial Service. It was held that if
the authority bona fide forms an opinion that the integrity of a particular officer is doubtful and it is
in public interest to compulsorily retire such judicial officer, judicial review of such order should be
made with great care and circumspection. It was specifically observed that when an order of
compulsory retirement is passed, the authority concerned has to take into consideration the whole
service record of the concerned officer which could include non−communicated adverse remarks
also. It would be apposite to refer to the following observations of this Court:
“218. On a careful consideration of the entire material, it must be held that the
evaluation made by the Committee/Full Court, forming their unanimous opinion, is
neither so arbitrary nor capricious nor can be said to be so irrational, so as to shock
the conscience of this Court to warrant or justify any interference. In cases of such
assessment, evaluation and formulation of opinions, a vast range of multiple factors
play a vital and important role and no one factor should be allowed to be blown out of
proportion either to decry or deify an issue to be resolved or claims sought to be
considered or asserted. In the very nature of things, it would be difficult, nearing
almost an impossibility 7 (2011) 10 SCC 1 to subject such exercise undertaken by the
Full Court to judicial review except in an extraordinary case when the Court is
convinced that some real injustice, which ought not to have taken place, has really
happened and not merely because there could be another possible view or someone
has some grievance about the exercise undertaken by the Committee/Full Court.
219. Viewed thus, and considered in the background of the factual details and
materials on record, there is absolutely no need or justification for this Court to
interfere with the impugned proceedings. Therefore, the three appeals fail and are
dismissed. Having regard to the facts of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.”
11. In R.C. Chandel v. High Court of M. P.8, this Court, after dealing with the entire law on the
subject, framed the following 3 questions of law:
“18. The questions that fall for consideration are:
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
6

(1) Whether the recommendation made by the High Court on the basis of unanimous
opinion to the Government for compulsory retirement of the appellant and the order
of compulsory retirement issued by the Government suffer from any legal flaw?
(2) Is the order of compulsory retirement so arbitrary or irrational that justifies
interference in judicial review?
(3) Is the view of the Division Bench upholding the order of the appellant’s
compulsory retirement so erroneous warranting interference by this Court in an
appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India?” The Court took note of the fact
that the appellant before it had been promoted and confirmed as District Judge and
was also 8 (2012) 8 SCC 58 given selection grade and super time scale etc., but it held
that these promotions would not wash off the earlier adverse entries which shall
remain on record. It would be pertinent to refer to paragraphs 26 and 29 of the
judgment which read as follows:
“26. It is true that the appellant was confirmed as District Judge in 1985; he got lower
selection grade with effect from 24−3−1989; he was awarded super timescale in May
1999 and he was also given above super timescale in 2002 but the confirmation as
District Judge and grant of selection grade and super timescale do not wipe out the
earlier adverse entries which have remained on record and continued to hold the
field. The criterion for promotion or grant of increment or higher scale is different
from an exercise which is undertaken by the High Court to assess a judicial officer’s
continued utility to the judicial system. In assessing potential for continued useful
service of a judicial officer in the system, the High Court is required to take into
account the entire service record. Overall profile of a judicial officer is the guiding
factor. Those of doubtful integrity, questionable reputation and wanting in utility are
not entitled to benefit of service after attaining the requisite length of service or age.
xxx xxx xxx
29. Judicial service is not an ordinary government service and the Judges are not
employees as such.
Judges hold the public office; their function is one of the essential functions of the State. In
discharge of their functions and duties, the Judges represent the State. The office that a Judge holds
is an office of public trust. A Judge must be a person of impeccable integrity and unimpeachable
independence. He must be honest to the core with high moral values. When a litigant enters the
courtroom, he must feel secured that the Judge before whom his matter has come, would deliver
justice impartially and uninfluenced by any consideration. The standard of conduct expected of a
Judge is much higher than an ordinary man. This is no excuse that since the standards in the society
have fallen, the Judges who are drawn from the society cannot be expected to have high standards
and ethical firmness required of a Judge. A Judge, like Caesar’s wife, must be above suspicion. The
credibility of the judicial system is dependent upon the Judges who man it. For a democracy to
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
7

thrive and the rule of law to survive, justice system and the judicial process have to be strong and
every Judge must discharge his judicial functions with integrity, impartiality and intellectual
honesty.”
12. In Rajasthan SRTC v. Babu Lal Jangir9, this Court held as follows:
“23. The principle of law which is clarified and stands crystallised after the judgment
in Pyare Mohan Lal v. State of Jharkhand is that after the promotion of an employee
the adverse entries prior thereto would have no relevance and can be treated as wiped
off when the case of the government employee is to be considered for further
promotion. However, this “washed−off theory” will have no application when the case
of an employee is being assessed to determine whether he is fit to be retained in
service or requires to be given compulsory retirement. The rationale given is that
since such an assessment is based on “entire service record”, there is no question of
not taking into consideration the earlier old adverse entries or record of the old
period. We may hasten to add that while such a record can be taken into
consideration, at the same time, the service record of the immediate past period will
have to be given due credence and weightage. For example, as against some very old
adverse entries where the immediate past record shows exemplary performance,
ignoring such a record of recent past and acting only on the basis of old adverse
entries, to retire a person will be a clear example of arbitrary exercise of power.
However, if old record pertains to integrity of a person then 9 (2013) 10 SCC 551 that
may be sufficient to justify the order of premature retirement of the government
servant.” (emphasis supplied) The view in Pyare Mohan Lal (supra) was reiterated.
The only caveat being that the entire record should be taken into consideration and
the earlier record even after promotions could not be ignored.
13. In High Court of Judicature of Patna v. Shyam Deo Singh10, this Court was dealing with a case
where a judicial officer was retired at the age of 58 years and was denied the benefit of service of 2
years. This Court has held as follows:
“8. The importance of the issue can hardly be gainsaid. The evaluation of the service
record of a judicial officer for the purpose of formation of an opinion as to his/her
potential for continued useful service is required to be made by the High Court which
obviously means the Full Court on the administrative side. In all High Courts such
evaluation, in the first instance, is made by a committee of senior Judges. The
decision of the Committee is placed before the Full Court to decide whether the
recommendation of the Committee should be accepted or not. The ultimate decision
is always preceded by an elaborate consideration of the matter by the Hon’ble Judges
of the High Court who are familiar with the qualities and attributes of the judicial
officer under consideration. This is also what had happened in the present case. The
very process by which the decision is eventually arrived at, in our 10 (2014) 4 SCC 773
view, should permit a limited judicial review and it is only in a rare case where the
decision taken is unsupported by any material or the same reflects a conclusion
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
8

which, on the face of it, cannot be sustained that judicial review would be
permissible.” Washed off theory
14. One of the main arguments raised by the petitioners is that since the petitioners have been
promoted to various higher posts, their record prior to the promotion will lose its sting and is not of
much value. Reliance is placed on the observations of this Court in D. Ramaswami v. State of T. N.11
wherein this Court held as follows:
“4. In the face of the promotion of the appellant just a few months earlier and nothing
even mildly suggestive of ineptitude or inefficiency thereafter, it is impossible to
sustain the order of the Government retiring the appellant from service. The learned
counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu argued that the Government was entitled to take
into consideration the entire history of the appellant including that part of it which
was prior to his promotion. We do not say that the previous history of a government
servant should be completely ignored, once he is promoted. Sometimes, past events
may help to assess present conduct. But when there is nothing in the present conduct
casting any doubt on the wisdom of the promotion, we see no justification for
needless digging into the past.”
15. Reference may also be made to the judgment of this Court in Pyare Mohan Lal (supra) in which
while dealing with the 11 (1982) 1 SCC 510 concept of washed off theory, this Court after dealing
with the entire case law on the subject held as follows:
“24. In view of the above, the law can be summarised to state that in case there is a
conflict between two or more judgments of this Court, the judgment of the larger
Bench is to be followed. More so, the washed−off theory does not have universal
application. It may have relevance while considering the case of government servant
for further promotion but not in a case where the employee is being assessed by the
reviewing authority to determine whether he is fit to be retained in service or requires
to be given compulsory retirement, as the Committee is to assess his suitability taking
into consideration his “entire service record”.
xxx xxx xxx
29. The law requires the authority to consider the “entire service record” of the
employee while assessing whether he can be given compulsory retirement
irrespective of the fact that the adverse entries had not been communicated to him
and the officer had been promoted earlier in spite of those adverse entries. More so, a
single adverse entry regarding the integrity of an officer even in remote past is
sufficient to award compulsory retirement.
The case of a judicial officer is required to be examined, treating him to be different from other
wings of the society, as he is serving the State in a different capacity. The case of a judicial officer is
considered by a committee of Judges of the High Court duly constituted by the Hon’ble the Chief
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
9

Justice and then the report of the Committee is placed before the Full Court. A decision is taken by
the Full Court after due deliberation on the matter. Therefore, there is hardly any chance to make
the allegations of non−application of mind or mala fides.”
16. The law on the subject of compulsory retirement, especially in the case of judicial officers may be
summarised as follows:
(i) An order directing compulsory retirement of a judicial officer is not punitive in
nature;
(ii) An order directing compulsory retirement of a judicial officer has no civil
consequences;
(iii) While considering the case of a judicial officer for compulsory retirement the
entire record of the judicial officer should be taken into consideration, though the
latter and more contemporaneous record must be given more weightage;
(iv) Subsequent promotions do not mean that earlier adverse record cannot be looked
into while deciding whether a judicial officer should be compulsorily retired;
(v) The ‘washed off’ theory does not apply in case of judicial officers specially in
respect of adverse entries relating to integrity;
(vi) The courts should exercise their power of judicial review with great
circumspection and restraint keeping in view the fact that compulsory retirement of a
judicial officer is normally directed on the recommendation of a high−powered
committee(s) of the High Court.
It is in the light of the aforesaid law that we will now consider the factual aspects of the present case.
17. In view of the fact that the Screening Committee has given detailed reasoning only after the
orders of this Court referred to above and in view of the limited scope of judicial review when there
are no allegations of mala fide, we would have avoided giving reasons to uphold such an order since
it does not amount to punishment and is not penal in nature. However, since the petitioners have
insisted that there is no material against them, we have no option but to refer to some of the reasons
given by the Screening Committee.
Case of Shri Arun Kumar Gupta
18. As far as Mr. Arun Kumar Gupta is concerned, there are two very serious allegations against him.
The first is that when he was working as Deputy Director, Administrative Training Institute at
Ranchi, as many as 10 ladies, who were Civil Service Probationers, made allegations that he was
using unwarranted and objectionable language during his lectures, citing indecent examples and
using words having double meaning, thereby causing embarrassment to the lady officers. We have
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
10

perused the complaints which are filed with the reply and the common refrain is that the language
used by Mr. Gupta during his lectures was highly sexist.
19. There is also another allegation that he had physically hurt a washerman by placing a hot iron on
the head of the washerman who had allegedly not ironed his clothes properly. It would be pertinent
to mention that the Principal District Judge had reported to the High Court that the victim had
personally approached him immediately after the occurrence and he (the Principal District Judge)
found that the victim had sustained burn injuries and he got the victim treated. It is true that Mr.
Arun Kumar Gupta was exonerated by the successor judicial officer before whom the complainant
denied having suffered any injury but we may note that this is a preliminary inquiry and the
successor Principal District Judge did not even care to examine his predecessor Principal District
Judge, who had not only been approached personally by the washerman, but who had himself noted
the burn injuries and had got the victim treated. Therefore, we are of the view that the Screening
Committee was right that the victim may have been put under some pressure to withdraw his
complaint. These occurrences are of the year 2011− 2012 and cannot be said to be very old.
20. In our view, the aforementioned two instances are sufficient to decide the case against the
petitioner. We may also note that Shri Raju Ramchandran, learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner has urged that the Screening Committee had only taken the entries from 1992−1993 to
2004−2005 and had ignored the entries from 2005−2006 to 2016−2017. As explained by Mr. Sunil
Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing for the High Court, all the ACRs were before the Screening
Committee but in the order it is only the adverse entries which have been noted. Be that as it may,
we are of the view that even if these adverse entries are ignored, the petitioner cannot be granted
relief for the reasons aforesaid.
Case of Shri Raj Nandan Rai
21. As far as this officer is concerned, we find that his record on many counts is not at all good. His
reputation and integrity have been doubted more than once in the years 1996−1997, 1997− 1998 and
2004−2005. Some adverse remarks have been conveyed to him. In the year 2015−2016, even his
knowledge of law and procedure is found to be average and his relation with the members of the Bar
was found not very good. There are also allegations against him of having granted bail for illegal
gratification and substance has been found in this allegation in the report of the Judicial
Commissioner, Ranchi (who is equivalent to the Principal District Judge). The officer had granted
bail by noting in the order that Section 327 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 was bailable whereas the
offence is non− bailable and an unrecorded warning regarding the integrity of the judicial officer
was issued to him in 2012. Conclusion
22. As is obvious from the law quoted above, adverse entries with regard to integrity do not lose
their sting at any stage. A judicial officer’s integrity must be of a higher order and even a single
aberration is not permitted. As far as the present cases are concerned, the matter has been
considered by the Screening Committee on two occasions and the recommendations of the
Screening Committee have been accepted by the Standing Committee on both occasions. The action
taken is not by one officer or Judge, it is a collective decision, first by the Screening Committee and
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
11

then approved by the Standing Committee.
23. Senior judges of the High Court who were the members of the Screening Committee and
Standing Committee have taken a considered and well−reasoned decision. Unless there are
allegations of mala fides or the facts are so glaring that the decision of compulsory retirement is
unsupportable this court would not exercise its power of judicial review. In such matters the court
on the judicial side must exercise restraint before setting aside the decision of such collective bodies
comprising of senior High Court Judges. In our opinion these are not fit cases to interfere with the
said decisions.
24. In view of the above, both the writ petitions are dismissed. Any pending application(s) shall
stand(s) disposed of.
……………………………..J. (L. Nageswara Rao) …………………………….J. (Deepak Gupta) New Delhi
February 27, 2020
Arun Kumar Gupta vs State Of Jharkhand on 27 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22543980/
12
