Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan
Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 208, (2020) 4 SCALE 36
Author: Indu Malhotra
Bench: Uday Umesh Lalit, Indu Malhotra, Hemant Gupta
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.1672 OF 2020
                               (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 5190 of 2019)
         Assistant Engineer (D1), Ajmer Vidyut                         …Appellant(s)
         Vitran Nigam Limited & Anr.
                                                  versus
         Rahamatullah Khan alias Rahamjulla                           …Respondent(s)
                          WITH C.A.NO.1673/2020 @ SLP©NO.4721/2020 @
                                            D.NO.33892/2018
                                             JUDGMENT
INDU MALHOTRA, J.
Delay condoned. Leave granted.
a) The issues which have arisen for consideration in the present Civil Appeal are : –
b) What is the meaning to be ascribed to the term “first due” in Section 56(2) of the Electricity Act,
2003?
c) In the case of a wrong billing tariff having been applied on account of a mistake, when would the
amount become “first due”?
d) Whether recourse to disconnection of electricity supply may be taken by the licensee company
after the lapse of two years in case of a mistake?
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
1

1. The factual matrix in which the aforesaid issues have arisen for our consideration is : – 1.1 In the
present case, for the period July, 2009 to September, 2011, the Respondent along with other
consumers were billed by the licensee company (the Appellant herein) under Tariff Code 4400
@Rs.1.65 per unit.
1.2 During the course of a regular audit being conducted by the Internal Audit Party, it was
discovered that in 52 cases, including that of the Respondent, the bills were raised under the wrong
Tariff Code 4400, instead of Tariff Code 9400, under which the prescribed tariff rate was Rs.2.10p.
per unit.
1.3 On 18.03.2014, the licensee company issued a show cause notice to various consumers, including
the Respondent, raising an additional demand for consumption of electricity for the past period
from July, 2009 to September, 2011. It was mentioned in the notice that the amount was payable in
view of the internal audit conducted by the department.
1.4 On 25.05.2015, the licensee company raised a bill demanding payment of Rs.29,604/- from the
Respondent under Tariff Code 9400 for the period July, 2009 to September, 2011.
1.5 Aggrieved by the said demand, the Respondent filed a Consumer Complaint before the District
Consumer Forum, Ajmer.
The District Forum vide Order dated 21.06.2016, allowed the Consumer Complaint, and held that
the additional demand was time-barred.
1.6 Thereafter, the State Commission vide Order dated 30.05.2017, allowed the Appeal of the
licensee company, and set aside the Order dated 21.06.2016 passed by the District Forum.
1.7 In the Revision Petition filed by the Respondent before the National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission, the Order passed by the State Commission was set aside. The National
Commission held that the additional demand was barred by limitation under Section 56(2) of the
Electricity Act, 2003 (“the Act”). 1.8 The licensee company has filed the present Civil Appeals before
this Court to challenge the final judgment dated 28.05.2018 passed by the National Commission. 1.9
This Court vide Order dated 05.03.2019 appointed Mr. Devashish Bharuka as Amicus Curiae to
assist this Court on the issues raised for determination.
It was further directed that the Appellant – Corporation would not be entitled to recover the
additional demand from the Respondent in this case, and only the questions of law would be
determined.
2. We have heard the learned Counsel on behalf of the Appellant – Corporation and the learned
Amicus Curiae.
3. Mr. Puneet Jain represented the licensee company, and submitted that the power to disconnect
electricity supply under Section 56(1) of the Act may be exercised by the licensee company when a
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
2

consumer neglects to pay the electricity charges, or any other sums due and payable by him. The
neglect to pay the “sum due” by a consumer, necessarily requires that there should be a “demand” of
the sum due from the consumer, which he is required to pay within the period stipulated. If the
demand is not paid within the stipulated time, then the power of disconnection under Section 56(1)
may be resorted to.
3.1 It was further submitted that when a bill or demand is raised, which is disputed by the
consumer, he may raise the dispute before the Authorities as provided by Section 42(5) or 42(6) of
the Act, or avail such other remedies as may be available in law, such as a suit for declaration and
injunction; consumer dispute before the consumer fora; arbitration if provided by the governing
agreement. 3.2 Section 56(1) of the Act confers the power of disconnection of electricity supply for
default of payment upon a licensee, and provides the conditions when such a power may be invoked,
the procedure and manner of the exercise of such power, the period for which such power can
remain effective, and the circumstances under which such a power cannot be exercised.
3.3 Sub-section (2) of Section 56 bars the remedy of disconnection of supply for default of payment,
if the consumer deposits the amount demanded under protest, or if the demand has been raised two
years after the sum became “first due”, albeit the same had been continuously shown to be
recoverable as arrears of charges.
3.4 The word “due” has been used under Section 56(1) as well as under Section 56(2). The term
“due” refers to the amount for which the demand is raised by way of a bill. The term “first due”
would therefore imply when the demand is raised for the first time. The bill raised by the licensee
company would be the starting point for the exercise of power under sub-section (1) of Section 56.
3.5 The starting point of limitation would be from the date when the bill is raised by the licensee
company. The bar of limitation is applicable only on the exercise of power of disconnection. As per
sub-section (2) of Section 56, the bar of limitation would be two years from the date when the first
bill is raised.
3.6 It was further submitted that in case of a mistake, the starting point of limitation should be the
date when the mistake is discovered.
In the present case, during a regular internal audit conducted on 18.03.2014, it was discovered that
a mistake had occurred in 52 cases, including that of the Respondent, as the bills were raised under
the wrong Tariff Code. The Appellant–Corporation raised additional demands on 25.05.2015, i.e.,
within two years from the discovery of the mistake.
4. The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that Section 56(1) of the Act empowers the licensee to
disconnect the electricity supply if the consumer neglects to pay his dues. The disconnection would
take place only after the consumer has consumed the electricity, and the bill has been generated. If
the consumer neglects to pay the bill served on him within the stipulated period, the licensee can
resort to coercive modes of recovery provided in the Act.
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
3

4.1 The words “first due” used in the first part of sub-section (2) of Section 56 is used in the context
of the sum quantified by the licensee in the bill; while the second part of sub-section (2) of Section
56 indicates the date when the first bill for the supply of electricity was raised by the licensee under
the applicable State Electricity Supply Code.
4.2 By treating the words “first due” to mean the date of detection of mistake, would dilute the
mandate of the two year limitation period provided by Section 56(2), since a mistake may be
detected at any point of time. Furthermore, the words “recoverable as arrears of charges” would be
rendered completely otiose and nugatory.
4.3 The period of limitation under Section 56(2) cannot be extended by raising a supplementary bill.
The “sum due” raised in the original bill, and not paid by the consumer, must be continuously
shown as arrears of charges in subsequent bills, for it to become recoverable by taking recourse to
the coercive mode of disconnection of electricity supply.
4.4 If after the expiry of two years of the original demand, any genuine or bona fide mistake is
detected by the licensee in the original bill, it would be entitled to raise a supplementary bill. The
licensee company would be entitled to resort to other modes of recovery, but not by disconnection of
supply under sub-section (1) of Section 56 of the 2003 Act.
6. Findings and Analysis The Electricity Act, 2003 is a consumer-friendly statute.1 The Statement of
Objects and Reasons to the Act notes that over a period of time, the performance of State Electricity
Boards had deteriorated on account of various factors, and the need was felt to frame a
self-contained comprehensive legislation, which led to the enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003. 1
Tata Powers v. Reliance Energy, (2008) 10 SCC 321. 6.1 Electricity has been held to be “goods” by a
Constitution Bench in State of Andhra Pradesh v. National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd.2 Under
the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 a purchaser of goods is liable to pay for it at the time of purchase or
consumption. The quantum and time of payment may be ascertained post facto either by way of an
agreement or the relevant statute.
In the case of electricity, the charges are ascertained and recovered as per the tariff notified by the
State Electricity Board, or under an electricity supply agreement between the parties read with the
tariff under Section 62(1)(d), and the Electricity Supply Code framed under Section 50.
6.2 The present Civil Appeal pertains to the interpretation of Section 56 of the Act which reads as
follows : – “Section 56. Disconnection of supply in default of payment – (1) Where any person
neglects to pay any charge for electricity or any sum other than a charge for electricity due from him
to a licensee or the generating company in respect of supply, transmission or distribution or
wheeling of electricity to him, the licensee or the generating company may, after giving not less than
fifteen clear days’ notice in writing, to such person and 2 (2002) 5 SCC 203.
without prejudice to his rights to recover such charge or other sum by suit, cut off the supply of
electricity and for that purpose cut or disconnect any electric supply line or other works being the
property of such licensee or the generating company through which electricity may have been
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
4

supplied, transmitted, distributed or wheeled and may discontinue the supply until such charge or
other sum, together with any expenses incurred by him in cutting off and reconnecting the supply,
are paid, but no longer:
Provided that the supply of electricity shall not be cut off if such person deposits,
under protest, -
a) an amount equal to the sum claimed from him, or
b) the electricity charges due from him for each month calculated on the basis of
average charge for electricity paid by him during the preceding six months, whichever
is less, pending disposal of any dispute between him and the licensee.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no sum due from any consumer, under this section shall be recoverable after the
period of two years from the date when such sum became first due unless such sum
has been shown continuously as recoverable as arrear of charges for electricity
supplied and the licensee shall not cut off the supply of the electricity.” (emphasis
supplied) Section 56 provides for disconnection of supply in the case of default in
payment of electricity charges.
Sub-section (1) of Section 56 provides that where any person “neglects” to pay “any charge” for
electricity, or “any sum” other than a charge for electricity due from him to a licensee or generating
company, the licensee after giving 15 days’ written notice, may disconnect the supply of electricity,
until such charges or other sums due, including the expenses incurred, are paid. However, the
disconnection cannot continue after the amounts are paid.
6.3 The obligation of a consumer to pay electricity charges arises after the bill is issued by the
licensee company. The bill sets out the time within which the charges are to be paid. If the consumer
fails to pay the charges within the stipulated period, they get carried forward to the next bill as
arrears.
6.4 The proviso to Section 56(1) carves out an exception by providing that the disconnection will not
be effected if the consumer either deposits the amount “under protest”, or deposits the average
charges paid during the preceding six months.
6.5 Sub-section (2) of Section 56 by a non obstante clause provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, no sum due from any consumer, shall be
recoverable under Section 56, after the expiry of two years from the date when the sum became “first
due”, unless such sum was shown continuously recoverable as arrears of charges for the electricity
supplied, nor would the licensee company disconnect the electricity supply of the consumer.
The effect of a non obstante clause was explained by this Court in Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao v.
Ashalata S. Guram.3 It was held that : – “69. A clause beginning with the expression
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
5

‘notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in some particular provision in the Act or in some
particular Act or in any law for the time being in force, or in any contract’ is more often than not
appended to a section in the beginning with a view to give the enacting part of the section in case of
conflict an overriding effect over the provision of the Act or the contract mentioned in the
non-obstante clause. It is equivalent to saying that in spite of the provision of the Act or any other
Act mentioned in the non-obstante clause or any contract or document mentioned the enactment
following it will have its full operation or that the provisions embraced in the non-obstante clause
would not be an impediment for an operation of the enactment.” (emphasis supplied) 6.6. The
liability to pay arises on the consumption of electricity. The obligation to pay would arise when the 3
(1986) 4 SCC 447.
bill is issued by the licensee company, quantifying the charges to be paid.
Electricity charges would become “first due” only after the bill is issued to the consumer, even
though the liability to pay may arise on the consumption of electricity.
7. The next issue is as to whether the period of limitation of two years provided by Section 56(2) of
the Act, would be applicable to an additional or supplementary demand. 7.1 Prior to the coming into
force of the Electricity Act, 2003, the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 governed the law pertaining to the
use and supply of electricity in India. Section 24 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 read as follows :–
“24. Discontinuance of supply to consumer neglecting to pay charge.
(1) Where any person neglects to pay any charge for energy or any sum, other than a charge for
energy, due from him to a licensee in respect of the supply of energy to him, the licensee may, after
giving not less than seven clear days’ notice in writing to such person and without prejudice to his
right to recover such charge or other sum by suit, cut off the supply and for that purpose cut or
disconnect any electric supply-line or other works being the property of the licensee, through which
energy may be supplied, and may discontinue the supply until such charger or other sum, together
with ally expenses incurred by him in cutting off and reconnecting the supply, are paid, but no
longer.
(2) Where any difference or dispute which by or under this Act is required to be determined by an
Electrical Inspector, has been referred to the Inspector before notice as aforesaid has been given by
the licensee, the licensee shall not exercise the powers conferred by this section until the Inspector
has given his decision:
Provided that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply in any case
in which the licensee has made a request in writing to the consumer for a deposit
with the Electrical Inspector of the amount of the licensee’s charges or other sums in
dispute or for the deposit of the licensee’s further charges for energy as they accrue,
and the consumer has failed to comply with such request.” The Standing Committee
of Energy in its Report dated 19.12.2002 submitted to the 13th Lok Sabha, opined
that Section 56 of the 2003 Act is based on Section 24 of the 1910 Act.
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
6

The Standing Committee further opined that a restriction has been added for
recovery of arrears pertaining to the period prior to two years from consumers,
unless the arrears have been continuously shown in the bills. Justifying the addition
of this restriction, the Ministry of Power submitted that : – “It has been considered
necessary to provide for such a restriction to protect the consumers from arbitrary
billings.” 7.2 In Swastic Industries v. Maharashtra State Electricity Board,4 this Court
while interpreting Section 24 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 held that : – “5. It
would, thus, be clear that the right to recover the charges is one part of it and right to
discontinue supply of electrical energy to the consumer who neglects to pay charges is
another part of it.” (emphasis supplied) 7.3 Sub-section (1) of Section 56 confers a
statutory right to the licensee company to disconnect the supply of electricity, if the
consumer neglects to pay the electricity dues.
This statutory right is subject to the period of limitation of two years provided by sub-section (2) of
Section 56 of the Act.
7.4 The period of limitation of two years would commence from the date on which the electricity
charges became “first due” under sub-section (2) of Section 56. This 4 (1997) 9 SCC 465.
provision restricts the right of the licensee company to disconnect electricity supply due to
non-payment of dues by the consumer, unless such sum has been shown continuously to be
recoverable as arrears of electricity supplied, in the bills raised for the past period.
If the licensee company were to be allowed to disconnect electricity supply after the expiry of the
limitation period of two years after the sum became “first due”, it would defeat the object of Section
56(2).
8. Section 56(2) however, does not preclude the licensee company from raising a supplementary
demand after the expiry of the limitation period of two years. It only restricts the right of the
licensee to disconnect electricity supply due to non-payment of dues after the period of limitation of
two years has expired, nor does it restrict other modes of recovery which may be initiated by the
licensee company for recovery of a supplementary demand.
9. Applying the aforesaid ratio to the facts of the present case, the licensee company raised an
additional demand on 18.03.2014 for the period July, 2009 to September, 2011.
The licensee company discovered the mistake of billing under the wrong Tariff Code on 18.03.2014.
The limitation period of two years under Section 56(2) had by then already expired.
Section 56(2) did not preclude the licensee company from raising an additional or supplementary
demand after the expiry of the limitation period under Section 56(2) in the case of a mistake or bona
fide error. It did not however, empower the licensee company to take recourse to the coercive
measure of disconnection of electricity supply, for recovery of the additional demand.
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
7

As per Section 17(1)(c) of the Limitation Act, 1963, in case of a mistake, the limitation period begins
to run from the date when the mistake is discovered for the first time.
In Mahabir Kishore and Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh,5 this Court held that :– 5 (1989) 4 SCC 1.
“Section 17(1)(c) of the Limitation Act, 1963, provides that in the case of a suit for relief on the
ground of mistake, the period of limitation does not begin to run until the plaintiff had discovered
the mistake or could with reasonable diligence, have discovered it. In a case where payment has
been made under a mistake of law as contrasted with a mistake of fact, generally the mistake
become known to the party only when a court makes a declaration as to the invalidity of the law.
Though a party could, with reasonable diligence, discover a mistake of fact even before a court
makes a pronouncement, it is seldom that a person can, even with reasonable diligence, discover a
mistake of law before a judgment adjudging the validity of the law.” (emphasis supplied) In the
present case, the period of limitation would commence from the date of discovery of the mistake i.e.
18.03.2014. The licensee company may take recourse to any remedy available in law for recovery of
the additional demand, but is barred from taking recourse to disconnection of supply of electricity
under sub-section (2) of Section 56 of the Act.
10. We extend our appreciation to Mr. Devashish Bharuka, Advocate who has very ably assisted this
Court as Amicus Curiae.
The present Civil Appeals are accordingly disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
All pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of. Ordered accordingly.
.....................................J. (UDAY UMESH LALIT) .…...............………………J. (INDU MALHOTRA)
New Delhi, February 18, 2020
Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190288453/
8
