Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And
Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 727, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
69, (2020) 1 RENCR 274, (2020) 2 SCALE 512
Author: Sanjiv Khanna
Bench: Krishna Murari, Sanjiv Khanna, N.V. Ramana
                                                                                 REPORTA
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2870 OF 2007
          BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED
                                                                           ...   APPELLA
                                                 VERSUS
          R. CHANDRAMOULEESWARAN AND OTHERS
                                                                           ... RESPONDEN
                                                                    WITH
                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.761 OF 2020
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2645 OF 2010
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.763 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 19246 OF 
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.765 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34955 OF 
                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.766 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34945 OF 
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.767 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34839 OF 
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.768 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 16686 OF 
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.769 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 17435 OF 
Signature Not Verified
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
1

Digitally signed by
GEETA AHUJA
                                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS.770-771 OF 2020
Date: 2020.01.28
16:24:01 IST
Reason:
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS.29712-713 OF
                                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.772 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 7165 OF 2
                         Civil Appeal No. 2870 of 2007 and Others                     Pa
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.773 OF 2020
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3842 OF 2017)
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.774 OF 2020
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 32286 OF 2017)
                                           AND
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.775-776 OF 2020
(ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS.18342-343 OF 2018)
                               JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted in the special leave petitions.
2. The above-captioned appeals filed by the three oil companies, namely, Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation
Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘the appellant’), raise an identical question of law relating to the
right of a tenant, in terms of Section 9 of the Madras City Tenants’ Protection Act, 1921 (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Act’), to an order whereby the landlords could be directed to sell the leasehold
land in whole or in part at the price fixed by the court.
3. Briefly, the appellant had under different written registered lease deeds with the landlords taken
land on long-term lease and had thereupon constructed petrol pumps that were given to and
operated by the dealers appointed by the appellant under the dealership agreements. In some cases
the leases were renewed on nationalisation of companies in terms of Burmah Shell (Acquisition of
Undertakings in India) Act, 1976, Caltex (Acquisition of Shares of Caltex Oil Refining (India)
Limited and of the Undertakings in India of Caltex (India) Limited) Act, 1977, and Esso (Acquisition
of Undertakings in India) Act, 1974. However, it is an accepted position that the term or duration of
the leases, even where leases were renewed, has expired in all cases.
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
2

4. The landlords, who are the contesting respondents before us, had or have filed suits for ejectment
for recovery of possession of the land. The appellant had filed applications purportedly in exercise of
their right under Section 9 of the Act for transfer/sale of the leasehold land in whole or in part at the
price fixed by the court. By different impugned judgments, some of which have arisen from the
remand order dated 3rd December 2009 passed by the Division Bench of this Court, the Madras
High Court has rejected the applications filed by the appellant, either affirming or reversing the
findings of the trial court or the lower appellate court.
5. Preamble of the Act as originally enacted in 1921 had stated:
“An Act to give protection to certain classes of tenants in the City of Madras.
WHEREAS it is necessary to give protection to tenants who in many parts of the City
of Madras have constructed buildings on others’ lands in the hope that they would
not be evicted so long as they pay a fair rent for the land and WHEREAS the sanction
of the Governor-General has been obtained under section 80-A (3) of the
Government of India Act” The Objects and Reasons of the Act read as under:
“In many parts of the City of Madras, dwelling houses and other buildings have, from
time to time, been erected by tenants on lands belonging to others, in the full
expectation that subject to payment of a fair ground rent, they would be left in
undisturbed possession, notwithstanding the absence of any specific contract as to
the duration of the lease or the terms on which the buildings were to be leased.
Recently, attempts made on steps taken to evict a large number of such tenants have
shown that such expectations are likely to be defeated. The tenants, if they are
evicted, can at the best remove the superstructure, which can only be done by pulling
down the buildings. As a result of such wholesale destruction, congested parts of the
City will become more congested to the serious detriment of public health. In these
circumstances, it is just and reasonable that the landlords when they evict the tenants
should pay for and take the buildings. There may, however, be cases where the
landlord is unwilling to eject a tenant if he can get a fair rent for the land. The Act
provides for the payment of compensation to the tenant in case of ejectment for the
v a l u e  o f  a n y  b u i l d i n g  w h i c h  m a y  h a v e  b e e n  e r e c t e d  b y  h i m  o r  h i s
predecessors-in-interest. It also provides for the settlement of fair rent at the instance
of the landlord or tenant. Provision is also made to enable the tenant to purchase the
land in his occupation subject to certain conditions.” The Act as enacted in 1921 was
to give protection to a certain class of tenants in the city of Madras who had before
the enactment of the Act, and not after the enactment, constructed structures on the
leasehold lands in the city of Madras. The objects and reasons refer to a peculiar
situation prevailing in the city of Madras where dwelling houses and other buildings
had been erected by the tenants on land taken on lease in expectation and belief that
their possession would not be disturbed, subject to payment of fair-ground rent to the
landlords. The agreements with the landlords, reasons record, would be silent on
duration of the lease and the terms on which the buildings were to be leased. Reasons
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
3

further state that recently, that is before the enactment in 1921, attempts and steps
had been initiated by the landlords to evict large number of such tenants, thereby the
general expectations of the tenants were likely to be defeated as they were liable to be
evicted. Therefore, the Act was enacted to prevent wholesale destruction of the
buildings/superstructures which were required to be pulled down by the tenants on
eviction. This would have caused serious detriment to public health as buildings were
to be demolished in the congested parts of the city. In these circumstances, it was
reasonable and proper that the tenants should be asked to pay fair market price of the
land to the landlords and become owners of the land. As some landlords would not be
interested in ejectment of a tenant, the Act provided for enhancement of rent in such
cases so that the landlord would get fair market rent. The Act dealt with payment of
compensation of the value of the building by the landlord in case the tenant did not
want to purchase or pay fair market value of the land.
6. The Act has undergone a paradigm shift in terms of its reach and ambit by extending protection to
leases and constructions made post-1921 and extension to areas other than the ones recognised in
the original enactment as well as by enhancing and modifying the terms of protection available to
the tenants. These amendments particularly vide the Madras Act No. 19 of 1955, Tamil Nadu Act No.
13 of 1960, Tamil Nadu Act No. 4 of 1972 and Tamil Nadu Act No. 24 of 1973 which have been
hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act, 1955; Amendment Act, 1960; Amendment Act, 1972
and Amendment Act, 1973, respectively, shall be expounded to the extent necessary for the present
decision. To avoid prolixity, we have avoided quoting and referring to the history of the legislation
and the changes made thereto.
7. By the Amendment Act, 1955, the Act was extended to ‘municipal towns and adjoining areas in the
State of Madras’ 1. By the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969 as amended by the Tamil
Nadu Adaptation of Laws (Second Amendment) Order, 1969, the expression ‘State of Tamil Nadu’
was substituted for the words This was further amended by the Madras City Tenants’ Protection
(Amendment) act, 1979 whereby the words “municipal towns” were substituted by the words
“municipal towns and townships”. ‘State of Madras’. The Amendment Act, 1972 had also amended
the Preamble by deleting the words ‘in the hope that they would not be evicted’. The Preamble as it
stands now reads as under:
“An Act to give protection to certain classes of tenants in municipal towns and
townships and adjoining areas in the State of Tamil Nadu.
WHEREAS, it is necessary to give protection against eviction to tenants, who in
municipal towns and townships and adjoining areas in the State of Tamil Nadu have
constructed buildings on others’ land so long as they pay a fair rent for the land;”
With the amendments, the Act was extended to be applied even to leases of land
executed post the enactment and enforcement of the Act in 1921. However, the Act
even post the amendments applies only to those leases of land on which building was
constructed by the tenant prior to the date specified and not post the date specified.
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
4

8. We would begin our interpretation by referring to in brief the scheme of the Act which postulates
and grants certain rights that may be exercised by the tenant facing eviction proceedings. Under
Section 3 of the Act, the tenant is entitled to be paid compensation equivalent to the value of the
building, which he or any of his predecessors in interest or any person not in occupation at the time
of ejectment who derived title from either of them, had erected and for which compensation has not
been already paid. The tenant is also entitled to the value of the trees and any improvements which
may have been planted/made by him. Section 9 of the Act grants the tenant, who is entitled to
compensation under Section 3 and against whom a suit for ejectment has been instituted or
proceeding under Section 41 of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (Central Act XV of
1882) taken by the landlord, to apply for an order directing the landlord to sell for a price to be fixed
by the court, in whole or in part, the extent of land specified in the application. Under clause
(b) to Section 9(1), the court shall decide the minimum extent of the land which is necessary for the
convenient enjoyment by the tenant and accordingly fix the price for the land either as prayed by the
applicant or as determined by the court, whichever is less.
9. Section 12 protects the rights of a tenant against eviction, notwithstanding the contract entered
into by a tenant. However, prior to its amendment vide the Amendment Act, 1972, the override and
paramountcy of the Act was not applicable to written registered leases of land that had stipulations
as to the ‘erection of buildings’. Section 12 as originally enacted had stated:
“12. Effect of contracts made by tenants. – Nothing in any contract made by a tenant
shall take away or limit his rights under this Act provided that nothing herein
contained shall affect any stipulations made by the tenant in writing registered as to
the erection of buildings, in so far as they relate to buildings erected after the date of
the contract.” Thus, the proviso to Section 12 had given primacy to the written
registered document with a covenant as to ‘erection of buildings’ after the date of the
agreement. Parties are ad idem that the effect of the proviso was to effectively deny
the tenants the statutory right to purchase land under Section 9 or enforce other
rights under the Act where the written registered agreement had a stipulation
relating to ‘erection of buildings’ by the tenant, in which event parties would be
bound by the terms of the agreement and the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, and the
Act, that is the Madras City Tenants’ Protection Act, 1921, would not apply. The
proviso to Section 12 viz., the words ‘provided that nothing herein contained shall
affect any stipulations made by the tenant in writing registered as to the erection of
buildings insofar as they relate to buildings erected after the date of the contract’
were deleted vide Section 3 of the Amendment Act, 1972 which reads:
“3. Amendment of Section 12, Tamil Nadu Act III of 1922.─ In section 12 of the
principal Act, the portion commencing with the words “provided that” and ending
with the words “date of the contract” shall be, and shall be deemed always to have
been, omitted.” Section 3 of the Amendment Act, 1972 postulates that the deleted
words shall be always deemed to have been omitted and did not form part of the
statute. A deeming provision with retrospective effect was thus enacted. We are not
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
5

dealing with the constitutional validity of the amendment made and, therefore, would
not comment upon this aspect.
10. In N. Vajrapani Naidu v. New Theatres Carnatic Talkies Ltd., Coimbatore,2 the Constitution
Bench of five judges had upheld validity of the Act, as it existed before the amendments vide the
Amendment Acts of 1972 and 1973, after referring to Section 12 which had then vide the proviso
excluded the written registered lease deeds with the stipulation as to ‘erection of buildings’ from
application of the Act, to observe that the Act applies only to a limited class of land, that is, land
granted on lease for construction of buildings before the date with effect from which the Act was
extended to the town or village. The purpose and objective behind the enactment was to give
protection to the tenants who had, notwithstanding the usual covenant relating to the determination
of tenancies, obtained land on lease in the hope that as long as they pay and continue to pay fair
rent, they would not be evicted. However, the changed circumstances as a result of the war leading
to appreciation in land values and increase in rents had put such tenants to great inconvenience and
harassment as they were faced with actions of ejectment involving dismantling of properties
constructed by them and eviction. Upholding the Act, as (1964) 6 SCR 1015 it then existed, the
Constitution Bench observed that the protection and rights granted under the Act become effective
only when the landlord seeks to obtain, in breach of mutual understanding, benefit of unearned
increase in the land values by instituting a suit for ejectment. The Act was manifestly in the interest
of general public to effectuate the mutual understanding between the landlords and the tenants as to
the duration of the tenancies, and to conserve the existing buildings so constructed. Section 9 did
not do much to deprive the landlord of his property or to acquire his rights as it was to give effect to
the real agreement between the landlord and the tenant consequent to which the tenant was induced
to construct a building on the plot let out to him. The restriction would be in the interest of the
general public and, therefore, the Act did not offend the right to property under Article 19(1)(f) of
the Constitution of India. Referring to the amendments vide the Amendment Act, 1960, it was
observed that the court can direct sale only of minimum area of land necessary for convenient
enjoyment by the tenant of the property/building built by him and the price to be paid was the
average market value of three years immediately preceding the date of the order. In this decision,
the majority had differed from the minority on the meaning of the expression ‘erection of buildings’
in the context of written registered lease deed in question, with the majority holding that the tenant
was not covered by the proviso as the clauses of the written registered lease deed did not relate to
‘erection of buildings’. The expression ‘erection of buildings’ in the proviso to Section 12 was
subsequently interpreted in Haridas Girdhardas and Others v. Varadaraja Pillai and Another3.
However, we need not go into the said aspect and interpretation of the expression ‘erection of
buildings’ because this question neither arises in the present appeals nor is raised and argued before
us.
11. We would now reproduce clause (4) to Section 2 of the Act which defines the expression ‘tenant’
as amended from time to time. Originally Section 2(4) of the Act read as under:
“4. ‘tenant’ means tenant of land liable to pay rent on it, and every other person
deriving title from him, and includes persons who continue in possession after the
termination of the tenancy.” By the Amendment Act, 1960 which came into force on
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
6

27 th July 1960, the definition of ‘tenant’ was substituted to read as under:
“4. ‘Tenant’ in relation to any land –
(i) means a person liable to pay rent in respect of such land, under a tenancy
agreement express or implied, and
(ii) includes─
(a) any such person as is referred to in sub-
clause (i) who continues in possession of the land (1971) 2 SCC 601 after the determination of the
tenancy agreement, and
(b) the heirs of any such person as is referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii)(a), but does not
include a sub-tenant or his heirs.” The Amendment Act, 1973, while retaining sub-clause (ii)(a) had
added a new sub-clause (b) in Section 2(4)(ii). The earlier sub-clause (b) inserted vide the
Amendment Act, 1960 was transposed as sub-clause (c). Post the amendment vide the Amendment
Act, 1973, clause (4) to Section 2 defining the term ‘tenant’ would read as under:
“(4) ‘Tenant’ in relation to any land –
(i) means a person liable to pay rent in respect of such land, under a tenancy
agreement express or implied, and
(ii) includes –
(a) any such person as is referred to in sub-
clause (i) who continues in possession of the land after the determination of the tenancy agreement,
(b) any person who was a tenant in respect of such land under a tenancy agreement to which this Act
is applicable under sub-section (3) of Section 1 and who or any of his predecessors in interest had
erected any building on such land and who continues in actual physical possession of such land and
building, notwithstanding that† (1) such person was not entitled to the rights under this Act by
reason of the proviso to Section 12 of this Act as it stood before the date of the publication of the
Madras City Tenants’ Protection (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1972), or (2) a decree
for declaration or a decree or an order for possession or for similar relief has been passed against
such person on the ground that the proviso to Section 12 of this Act as it stood before the date of the
publication of the Madras City Tenants’ Protection (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of
1972) disentitled such person for claiming the rights under this Act, and
(c) the heirs of any such person as is referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii)(a) or (ii)(b), but
does not include a sub-tenant or his heirs;” Section 2 of the Amendment Act, 1973 which brought in
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
7

the amendment in Section 2(4) gave retrospective effect to the amendments from the date of
enforcement of the Act, that is, 21 st February 1922. For clarity, we would like to reproduce Section 2
of the Amendment Act, 1973 which reads as under:
“2. Amendment of section 2, Tamil Nadu Act III of 1922.─ For sub-clause (ii) of
clause (4) of section 2 of the Madras City Tenants’ Protection Act, 1921 (Tamil Nadu
Act III of 1922) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following sub-
clause shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted […]”
12. A Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 3 rd December 2009 in C.A. No.
5903 of 2006 titled Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v. Nirmala and Another and
other connected matters while interpreting sub-clause (b) to Section 2(4)(ii) has held
that the expression ‘actual physical possession of land and building’ would mean and
require the tenant to be in actual physical possession.
The provisions would not be applicable if the tenant is not in actual physical possession and has
given the premises on lease or licence basis to a third party. The Court, however, did not give any
finding on the question whether such benefit is available to the appellant under Section 2(4)(i) or
Section 2(4)(ii)(a). We are reproducing the relevant portion of the order which reads as under:
“7. As regards sub-clause (b) of Section 2(4), we do not agree with the contention of
Mr. Nariman. On a plain reading of sub-clause (b) we notice that it uses the words
"actual physical possession". Had the word ’possession’ alone been used in clause (b),
as has been done in clause (a), the legal position may have been different. However,
the words ‘actual physical possession’ are strong and emphatic. That means that the
factual state of affairs has to be seen, not the legal or deemed state of affairs. There is
no doubt that the appellant had handed over possession to his licensee/agent who
was in actual physical possession of the suit premises. When a Statute uses strong
and emphatic words, we cannot twist or give a strained interpretation to the said
words. The literal rule of interpretation is the first rule of interpretation which means
that if the meaning of a Statute is plain and clear then it should not be given a twisted
or strained meaning. We will be giving a strained and artificial interpretation to the
words ‘actual physical possession’ if we say that the appellant is deemed to be in
actual physical possession. We cannot give such an interpretation to sub-clause
(b) of Section 2(4) of the Act particularly since clause (a) only uses the word
‘possession’ and not ‘actual physical possession’. Hence, we reject the contention of
Mr. R.F. Nariman, learned counsel appearing for the appellant and hold that the
appellant was not in actual physical possession.
8. The Preamble of the Act makes it clear that the Act applies where superstructure is constructed on
the land, which is leased. Hence, the submission that clause (a) applies when there is no
superstructure erected on the vacant land which was leased is not correct. In fact, the Act was meant
to give some protection to leased land on which the tenant constructed some superstructure.
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
8

9. As regards the submission of Mr. Nariman that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of sub-
clause (a) of Section 2(4) of the Act, it appears that this aspect has not been considered by the High
Court. In our opinion, the High Court should have considered whether the appellant is entitled to
the benefit of Section 2(4)(i) and sub-clause (a) of Section 2(4)(ii) of the Act.
10. We are not expressing any final opinion on the question whether the appellant is entitled to the
benefit of Section 2(4)(i) and 2(4)(ii)(a) of the Act as in our opinion it was incumbent upon the High
Court to have recorded a finding on the said issue. Therefore, we set aside the impugned judgment
and order of the High Court and remand the matter back to the Division Bench of the High Court to
record a finding on the question whether the appellant is entitled to the benefit of Section 2(4)(i)
and sub-clause (a) of Section 2(4)(ii) of the Act. Needless to mention, that the Division Bench of the
High Court shall decide the said question in accordance with law and uninfluenced by any
observation made by us in this order except the finding that the appellant is not covered by
subclause (b) of Section 2(4) of the Act. We make it clear that we are not expressing any opinion of
our own on the other issue. We hope and trust that the Division Bench of the High Court will
dispose of the case expeditiously and preferably within a period of six months from the date a copy
of this order is produced before it.
xx xx xx
12. We are further of the opinion that where the lessee is in actual physical possession of the land
over which he has made construction then he is entitled to an additional benefit given by Section
9(1)(a) (ii) of the Act. However, if the lessee who has made construction on the land let out to him
but was not subsequently in possession of the same, as is the case of the appellants in the present
cases, then he is not entitled to the benefit of Section 9(1)(a)(ii) though he may be entitled to the
benefit of Section 9 (1)(a)(i). These are the questions on which the Division Bench of the High Court
will record a finding.
13. Therefore, we set aside the impugned judgments and orders of the High Court and remand the
matter back to the Division Bench of the High Court to record a finding on the question whether the
appellant is covered by Section 2(4)
(i) and sub-clause (a) of Section 2(4)(ii) of the Act and is entitled to the benefit of Section 9(1).
Needless to mention, the Division Bench of the High Court shall decide the said question in
accordance with law and uninfluenced by any observation made by us in this order except our
finding about clause (b) of Section 2(4). We make it clear that we are not expressing any opinion of
our own on other issues. We hope and trust that the Division Bench of the High Court will dispose of
these cases expeditiously and preferably within a period of six months from the date a copy of this
order is produced before it.” Thus, while interpreting sub-clause (b) to Section 2(4)(ii), this Court
has held that the expression ‘actual physical possession of land and building’ would mean and
require the tenant to be in actual possession and the sub-clause(b) would not apply if the tenant has
sub-let the building or has given the premises on leave and licence basis. The aforesaid decision
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
9

would operate as res judicata in the case of the appellant and the landlords who were parties to the
decision. In other cases, it would operate as a binding precedent under Article 141 of the
Constitution.
13. Before we go on to examine the challenge raised by the appellant, it is apparent that the Act
essentially protects the rights of three categories of tenants as enlisted under Section 2(4) of the Act,
viz., those covered under sub-clauses (i) and (ii)(a) who have always been protected under the
provisions of the Act; and by addition of clause (b) with retrospective effect the tenants who were
originally disallowed the benefits on account of the proviso to Section 12 of the Act; and lastly as per
sub-clause (c), heirs of the tenants covered under the aforesaid categories, but not sub- tenants and
heirs of sub-tenants. By excluding sub-tenants and their heirs, the legislature has made it clear that
sub-tenants would not be entitled to benefits and rights conferred under the Act including right to
purchase the land under Section 9 or compensation payable for the construction etc. under Sections
3 and 44 of the Act. Sub-tenants or the heirs of sub-tenants are not “4. Disposal of suits for
ejectment. – (1) In a suit for ejectment against a tenant in which the landlord succeeds, the Court
shall ascertain the amount of compensation, if any, payable under Section 3 and the decree in the
suit shall declare the amount so found due and direct that, on payment by the landlord into Court,
within three months from the date of the decree, of the amount so found due, the tenant shall put
the landlord into possession of the land with the building and trees thereon.
(2) In an application under Section 41 of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (Central Act
XV of 1882), in which the landlord succeeds, the Court shall ascertain the amount of compensation
payable under Section 3 and shall pass an interim order declaring the amount so found due and
stating that, on payment by the landlord into Court within three months of the date of the said
interim order of the amount so found due, the landlord shall be entitled to the order contemplated
by ‘tenants’ and hence in their case the question of possession or actual physical possession is
immaterial.
14. The Amendment Acts of 1972 and 1973 were wide and far reaching, beyond the object and
purpose of the Act as originally enacted. Moreover, several amendments to Sections 2(4), 9 and 12 of
the Act were with retrospective effect. We have already referred to the deletion of the proviso in
Section 12 with retrospective effect. The consequence of the deletion was that written registered
leases for land with stipulation relating to ‘erection of buildings’ would no longer enjoy primacy and
would be governed by the provisions of the Act as applicable. In other words, statutory mandate of
Sections 3, 4 and 9 of the Act would apply notwithstanding the terms of the written registered lease
deed relating to the ‘erection of buildings’ by the tenant and Section 108(h)5 of the Transfer of
Property Act. As the proviso to Section 12 stood deleted, the distinction carved out in terms of
Section 43 of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (Central Act XV of 1882). (3) In in such
suit or application, the Court finds that any sum of money is due by the tenant to the landlord for
rent or otherwise in respect of the tenancy, the Court shall set off such sum against the sum found
due under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, and shall pass a decree or interim
order declaring as the amount payable to the tenant on ejectment, the amount, if any, remaining due
to him after such set off.
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
10

(4) If the amount found due is not paid into Court within three months from the date of the decree
under sub-section (1) or of the interim order under sub-section (2), or if no application is made
under Section 6, the suit or application, as the case may be, shall stand dismissed, and the landlord
shall not be entitled to institute a fresh suit for ejectment, or present a fresh application for recovery
of possession for a period of five years from the date of such dismissal.” “108. Rights and liabilities
of lessor and lessee.— [...] (h) the lessee may 1 [even after the determination of the lease] remove, at
any time 2 [whilst he is in possession of the property leased but not afterwards,] all things which he
has attached to the earth: provided he leaves the property in the state in which he received it:”
Section 12 between written registered lease agreements with specific stipulations relating to
‘erection of buildings’ and other lease agreements, ceased to be applicable with retrospective effect
and the landlords and tenants with written registered leases were at par with those holding oral
tenancies or unregistered leases of land or written registered tenancies without any stipulation with
regard to ‘erection of building’ on the land. Pertinently, even before the deletion of the
words/proviso to Section 12 of the Act, the tenants, as defined by Section 2(4)(i) and (ii)(a) were
entitled to protection and benefit of Sections 3, 4 and 9 of the Act. The amendments made vide the
Amendment Acts of 1972 and 1973 did not, in any manner, dilute or withdraw the benefit or the
protection granted to the tenants not covered by the proviso to Section 12 of the Act. The
amendments vide the Amendments Acts of 1972 and 1973 were not to dilute the rights of the already
protected tenants, but to expand the Act’s protection and scope to the tenants who were denied the
benefit of the Act vide the proviso to Section 12 of the Act.
15. The amendments and modifications made by the Amendment Acts of 1972 and 1973 whereby
sub-clause (b) to Section 2(4)(ii) was added with retrospective effect, the proviso to Section 12 was
deleted with retrospective effect and the amendments to Section 9 were made with retrospective
effect, have to be read holistically and in entirety, for it is a well-known canon of construction that
every section of a statute is to be construed with reference to the context and other sections of the
statute, so as, as far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute.6 By these
amendments, the tenants excluded from the benefit/privilege of the Act vide the proviso to Section
12 were brought within the ambit of the protection and rights given under the Act but with different
conditions and stipulations. In other words, sub-clause (ii)
(b) to section 2(4) is restricted and applies to only those tenants who were covered by the proviso to
Section 12 and not those tenants who were already entitled to protection and rights under the Act.
This is clear from the latter portion of sub-clause (ii)(b) to Section 2(4) of the Act which refers to the
proviso to Section 12 and also a decree for declaration or possession or similar relief passed against
the person on the ground that proviso to Section 12 had disentitled such persons from claiming
rights under the Act. The amendment made by adding sub-clause (b) to Section 2(4)(ii) vide the
Amendment Act, 1973 was not to dilute or impose new conditions on the tenants who were
otherwise entitled to protection as tenants under Section 2(4)(i) or to Section 2(4)(ii)(a) of the Act
read with Sections 3, 4 and 9 of the Act. This also flows Raghbir Singh Gill v. Gurcharan Singh Tohra
and Others 1980 SCR (3)1302 quoting R v. Board of Trade, [1965] 1 Q.B. 603.
from the legislature using the word ‘continues in possession’ in sub-clause (ii)(a) to Section 2(4),
whereas the words used in sub- clause (ii)(b) are ‘continues in actual physical possession’. The
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
11

legislature deliberately has used different words in sub-clauses (ii)
(a) and (ii)(b). The enactment of sub-clause (ii)(b) has to be read with other amendments made vide
the Amendment Acts of 1972 and 1973 and would accordingly apply to those tenants who were
brought under the umbrella and protection of the Act by deleting the proviso to Section 12.
Therefore, sub-clause (ii)(b) to Section 2(4) would apply to tenants who were covered by the deleted
proviso to Section 12, whereas sub-clause (ii)(a) to Section 2(4) would apply to tenants who had
taken land on lease without any written registered instrument relating to the ‘erection of buildings’.
16. No doubt, sub-clause (ii)(a) to Section 2(4) refers to land, and the words ‘land’ and ‘building’
have been separately defined vide clauses (2) and (1) to Section 2 respectively, with the postulate
that land does not include building, however we are not inclined to hold that the distinction between
sub-clauses (ii)(a) and (ii)(b) to Section 2(4) is based upon whether a tenant had constructed a
building in which case sub-clause (ii)(b) would apply and not sub- clause (ii)(a). In other words, we
are not in agreement with the contention that where the tenant of a land has not constructed
building, sub-clause (ii)(a) would apply and where a tenant of land has constructed a building,
sub-clause (ii)(b) would apply. The reason is obvious. The Act as per the objects and purposes was
enacted and enforced to grant certain rights to tenants who had acquired leases of land and had
thereupon constructed a building with the implied understanding that they would not be evicted as
long as they paid the fair rent. The tenants covered by sub-clause
(ii)(a) were protected under the Act even before the enactment of sub-clause (b) to section 2(4)(ii) of
the Act vide the Amendment Act, 1973. The Act as originally enacted with Section 2(4) defining the
term ‘tenant’ before its amendment vide the Amendment Act, 1973 would apply to all the tenants
who had acquired leasehold land and thereafter constructed a building, except the tenants who had
entered into written registered contracts with terms relating to ‘erection of buildings’ who were
covered by the deleted proviso to Section 12.
17. Decision of the Constitution Bench of six judges in Swami Motor Transports (P) Ltd. And
Another v. Sri Sankaraswamigal Mutt and Another7 on which reliance was placed by the counsel for
the appellant, though relating to the Act, relates to the challenge to the Amendment Act, 1960 by
which non-residential buildings constructed on the leasehold land in the municipal towns of 1963
Supp (1) SCR 282 Tanjore were excluded and denied the benefit of the Act. This judgment upheld
constitutional validity predicated on the principle of classification under Article 14 and also the right
to property under Article 19(1)(f) read with Article 31(1) of the Constitution. Even in respect of
pending ejectment proceedings, it was observed that the law in India does not recognise equitable
estates. Further, the statutory right to purchase land is, or confers, no interest or right in the
property but only a right to purchase land. In the view of this Court, a statutory right to apply for the
purchase of the land is a non-proprietary right. On the question of equitable estates, it was observed
that Section 9 of the Act confers only a right in respect of the land owned by the landlord and not in
the superstructure which was owned by the tenant. The right of the tenant on the superstructure is
neither taken away nor affected under Section 9 of the Act or the amendment made vide the
Amendment Act, 1960. Even earlier, this Court in Dr. K.A. Dhairyawan and Others v. J.R. Thakur
and Others8, after referring to several decisions of the Privy Council, had held that there was no
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
12

absolute rule of law that whatever is affixed or built on the soil becomes a part of it, and is subjected
to the same rights of a property as the soil itself. We do not in India apply the doctrine of English
law as to buildings viz. that they should belong 1959 SCR 799 to the owner of the land. Where clause
(h) of Section 108 of the Transfer of Property Act would apply, the lessee can remove all the
structures and the buildings erected on the demised land while he is in possession of the property
but not afterwards, meaning thereby the ownership of the building is with the lessee and not with
the lessor. At the same time, nothing prevents the lessee from contracting to hand over the building
or the structure erected on the land constructed by him without receiving compensation.
18. In P. Ananthakrishnan Nair and Another v. Dr G. Ramakrishnan and Another,9 a Division
Bench of this Court interpreting Section 2(4) and Section 9 of the Act had held that as per the
mandate of Sections 3, 4 and 5, post the 1972 and 1973 amendments, it is mandatory for the court to
first decide the minimum extent of land “which may be necessary for the convenient enjoyment by
the tenant”. The words in italics were emphasised by the Division Bench to observe that the court
may, on facts of a particular case, come to a conclusion that the tenant may not require any portion
of the land and in that event it may reject the application and decree the suit for ejectment and
direct the landlord to pay compensation to the tenant. Section 9 confers a privilege on the tenant
and not a vested right, but the privilege (1987) 2 SCC 429 granted by the statute is equitable in
nature. Elucidating further, it was observed:
“11. […]The enquiry presupposes that the tenant making the application has been in
the occupation of the land and the superstructure wherein he may be either residing
or carrying on business, and on his eviction he would be adversely affected. The
policy underlying Section 9 of the Act, is directed to safeguard the eviction of those
tenants who may have constructed superstructure on the demised land, so that they
may continue to occupy the same for the purposes of their residence or business.” In
the said case, an eviction decree was passed observing that the tenant had in the
small portion of the land kept account books of the business and rest of the land and
structure standing thereon had been in occupation of sub-tenants since 1964.
19. In S.R. Radhakrishnan and Others v. Neelamegam10, this Court had again interpreted Section
2(4) and 9 of the Act after referring to the dictum in P. Ananthakrishnan (supra) elucidating that the
policy underlying Section 9 is to safeguard eviction of those tenants who may have constructed
superstructure on the demised land, so that they may continue to occupy the same for the purpose
of residence or business. Thus, the tenant not in actual possession of most of the demised premises
in P.Ananthakrishnan (supra) had suffered a decree for eviction. Therefore, it was held in P.
Ananthakrishnan (supra) that it will be (2003) 10 SCC 705 unreasonable to direct the landlord to
sell the land to the tenant. In the said case, application under Section 9 filed by the legal heir of the
tenant was dismissed observing that admittedly he was not in possession of the demised premises
and had ceased to be a tenant.
20. The counsel for the appellant had made a valiant attempt to distinguish the said decisions as P.
Ananthakrishnan (supra) was a case of sub-letting and in S.R. Radhakrishnan (supra), the court had
relied upon the reply of the defendant No.1 stating that he had nothing to do with the property as
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
13

defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were in possession thereof. It is correct that P. Ananthakrishnan (supra) was
a case of sub-letting which means parting of possession by the tenant to the sub-tenant. However,
the said case records observations as to the object and purpose behind Section 9 and the tenants
whose interests were sought to be protected. In S.R. Radhakrishnan (supra), the land had been
given on lease to the father of the defendant No. 1 who had thereafter in terms of lease made
constructions for setting up and running a printing press, in which business he had taken his
younger brothers, defendant Nos. 2 and 3, possibly as partners. Thereafter, he had executed a deed
in favour of defendant Nos. 2 and 3 relinquishing his business of the printing press. For the same
reasons, we would hold that the observations made relating to the interpretation of Sections 2(4)
and 9 are relevant even if we hold that the ratios are not applicable as the facts are not identical.
21. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold as under:
(I) Sub-clauses (i) and (ii)(a) to clause (4) of Section 2 of the Act apply to all tenants
who had entered into oral or unregistered written agreements or registered written
agreements without any stipulation with regard to ‘erection of buildings’ for taking
land on lease, and had subsequently constructed buildings. Such tenants would be
entitled to protection of the Act provided the tenant satisfies the conditions
mentioned in sub-clauses (i) or (ii)(a) to clause (4) of Section 2 of the Act.
(II) Paragraph 1 of sub-clause (ii)(b) to clause (4) of Section 2 of the Act applies to
tenants who are not entitled to the rights under the Act by reason of the proviso to
Section 12 which stood deleted vide the Amendment Act, 1972. Paragraph 2 of the
said sub-clause applies to cases where a decree of declaration or decree or an order of
possession or similar relief has been passed against a tenant on the ground that the
proviso to Section 12, which was omitted by the Amendment Act, 1972, disentitles the
tenant from claiming rights under the Act. Accordingly, sub-clause (b) to Section
2(4)(ii) would apply only to tenancies which were earlier excluded from the
protection under the Act vide the proviso to Section 12 which stands deleted with
retrospective effect vide the Amending Act, 1972.11 (III) Sub-clause (ii)(c) to clause
(4) of Section 2 states that heirs of a tenant referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clauses
(ii)(a) or (ii)(b) would be entitled to benefit of the Act. However, it expressly excludes
a sub-tenant or heirs of the sub-tenant.
22. Recording the aforesaid position, we dismiss the present appeals by the appellant, that is, the
three petroleum companies, and uphold the orders passed by the High Court that the appellant
tenants would not be entitled to the benefit and rights under the Act unless they are in actual
physical possession of the building constructed by them. In other words, in case the appellants have
let out or sub-let the building or given it to third parties, including dealers or licensees, they would
not be entitled to protection and benefit under the Act.
Paragraph 2 in sub-clause (ii)(b) to clause (4) of Section 2 of the Act, has been interpreted in
different judgments by the Madras High Court, including the decision in Haridas Girdhardas and
Others v. M. Varadaraja Pillai and Another [(1976) 89 Madras Law Weekly 1)]. Pertinently, in the
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
14

aforementioned case, the Madras High Court dealt with the applicability of sub-section (3A) to
Section 9 of the Act which stipulates the reopening or reviewing of a decree or order passed, in
terms of the deleted proviso to Section 12 of the Act, against the interests of the tenant, that is, those
who are covered under paragraph 2 of sub-clause (ii)(b) to Section 2(4) of the Act. We are not
required to examine the true impact and effect of the said paragraph 2 or sub-section (3A) to Section
9 of the Act as they are not relevant for the present decision. On this aspect, we make no comment.
In the facts of the case, there would be no order as to costs.
......................................J. (N.V. RAMANA) ......................................J. (SANJIV KHANNA)
......................................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 28, 2020.
Bharat Petroleum Corp.Ltd. vs R.Chandramouleeswaran And Ors. on 28 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8442571/
15
