Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 525
Author: S. Ravindra Bhat
Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                          1
                                                                                   REPOR
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     (CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION)
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). __________________OF 2020
                              (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 23202-23204 OF 2015)
          BIHAR STAFF SELECTION
          COMMISSION & ORS.                                                  ....APPELLA
                                                      VERSUS
          ARUN KUMAR & ORS.                                                  ...RESPONDE
                                                     WITH
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). __________________OF 2020
                              (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 29764-29765 OF 2015)
                                                        AND
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). __________________OF 2020
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 30109 OF 2016)
                                                      ORDER
S. RAVINDRA BHAT, J
1. Special leave granted. The parties were heard, with consent of their counsel.
2. These appeals are directed against a common judgment in LPA No. 1200/2013 (in CWJC No.
3640/2013), LPA No. 1170/2013 (in CWJC No. 3740/2013), LPA No. 1174/2013 (in CWJC No.
4265/2013) and LPA No. 1352/2013 in CWJC No. 3640/2013) of the Patna High Court, dated
24.06.2015.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
1

3. One set of appeals (arising from SLP(C) Nos. 23202-23204/2015) has been preferred by the Bihar
Staff Selection Commission (hereafter “BSSC”) and the other set (referred to as “the aggrieved party
appellants”) by several aggrieved parties, who were appellants before the Division Bench of the High
Court, in four intra-court appeals, which had questioned the judgment and order of a learned single
judge. The single judge set aside the results of the main examination, with consequential directions
to the BSSC to prepare fresh results of the Graduate Level Combined Examination-2010, in
accordance with the directions of the Court in relation to deletion/modification of questions and
answers as stipulated in the judgment. The aggrieved party appellants were not party to the writ
proceedings, but had been declared selected in terms of the results first published, and subsequently
were shown as not qualified under the revised results pursuant to the directions of the Court by the
learned single judge. Three appeals to the Division Bench were by candidates who were writ
petitioners and had impugned the judgment of the single judge in not granting them full relief in
respect of all questions that were challenged. These parties were not selected in the final results
declared.
4. The brief facts of the case are that on 18.06.2010, the BSSC issued an advertisement calling for
applications for selection of candidates to 1569 vacancies in Class III posts, in various departments
of the Government of Bihar. Examinations were conducted; on 12.04.2012, results of the
preliminary examination were declared; this became the subject matter of challenge before the
Patna High Court. The High Court, after calling for evaluation of the questions and the results
published by experts, directed fresh declaration of results. Resultantly, the fresh declaration of
results was made on 29.12.2012. 27,289 candidates qualified in the examination. Meanwhile the
number of vacancies increased to 3285 (from the original number of 1569). On 27.10.2013, the main
written examination (for selection), as part of the second phase, was held; those who had been
declared successful in the preliminary examination were allowed to compete. On 28.01.2013, the
model answers to the main examinations were published; the BSSC elicited comments and
objections to the model answers.
5. The BSSC constituted a committee of experts to examine the objections; their report suggested
changes with respect to 13 questions. The acceptance of the report meant consequential revision of
the result. This led to the filing of five writ petitions, before the Patna High Court. The results
declared by the BSSC were impugned on diverse grounds, including that the original number of
vacancies could not have been increased; that the increase in the number of candidates was
arbitrary and that the final results were based on answers to various questions, which were wrong.
6. The single judge, after considering the contentions of the parties on merits, held that the increase
in the number of vacancies to be considered for selection and appointment beyond the initially
advertised number, was valid and in consonance with the law declared by this court; it was further
held that the increase in the number of candidates allowed to compete for the post (i.e. 27,289
instead of the original 16,425 declared successful in the preliminary test) was justified, despite that
number exceeding the ratio (of consideration of five candidates for one post) because of the revision
in the results. The change in the result as a consequence of the expert committee’s report adversely
impacted 915 candidates who had been previously declared successful in the result of the
preliminary test declared on 12.04.2012. By an order of the Patna High Court in Manoj Kumar v.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
2

State of Bihar & Ors.1, it was held that these candidates should not be disturbed by the change in
result. The BSSC, therefore, retained these 915 candidates on the list of successful candidates.
Further, the change in answers caused the inclusion of several others who now obtained the same
marks as these 915 candidates. This resultant increase in the number of successful candidates from
16,425 to 27,289 was held to be permissible by the single judge.
2012 (1) PLJR 542 After examining the merits of the answers accepted by the BSSC, the single judge
was of the opinion that question numbers 82, 147, 148 and 149 were incorrect; the writ petitions
were allowed, with a direction to BSSC to re- evaluate the answer sheets of the candidates after
deleting the said four questions.
7. Two appeals were preferred against that decision of the single judge. It was contended that the
BSSC had wrongly assessed question nos. 61, 62, 67, 82, 98, 107, 111, 124, 125, 148 and 149. By the
impugned judgment, the Division Bench partly allowed the appeals. The operative directions in the
impugned judgment are extracted below:
“22. Thus, the only change we find is with regard to question No. 69 where the
correct answer is option (A). In respect of question No. 98, the correct answer is
option (D). The correct answer to question No. 107 is not available and has to be
deleted. In respect of question No. 111, we hold that it should not be deleted and the
correct answer is option (C).
23. Thus, we are inclined to interfere with the judgment of the learned Single Judge
only to the extent of these four questions in the manner indicated hereinabove.
24. Thus, the inevitable result would be, in order to ensure fairness of procedure of
selection, the results which were revised and published pursuant to orders of the
learned Single Judge would call for a further revision in respect of the four questions
as noted in the preceding paragraphs but it would not follow that as per the fresh
revised results of persons who had already been selected and appointed and have
been working but who do not make the mark this time would be disqualified and
dismissed. We hold that this would be highly iniquitous inasmuch as they are not
guilty of any fraud, malpractice but are mere victims of mistake committed not by
them. We have already noted judgments of the Apex Court in the cased Rajesh
Kumar (supra) and Vikash Pratap Singh (supra) in these regards but again that does
not end the matter. By change of answers of these four questions, as noted above,
there may be some persons, who are now found to have made to the final merit list
but, were not selected earlier leaving them out would be injustice. There would not be
many such persons.
25. Having considered the matter, we would accordingly order that such persons who
now come into the merit list would have to be adjusted, if vacancies were there were
(sic) or there are vacancies available in cadre, for which examination were held. Their
inter se seniority in the cadre to which they are allotted would be determined by inter
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
3

se merit position, irrespective of their date of appointment.
We order accordingly. With these observations and directions, these Letter Patent Appeals are,
accordingly, disposed of.”
8. The appellants in civil appeals arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 29764-65/2015 are aggrieved by the
impugned judgment; their complaint is that the Division Bench confined the relief in respect of only
four wrong answers; according to them, there were other defective questions or wrong answers: they
argue that question nos. 61, 62, 67, 82, 98, 107, 111, 124, 125, 148 and 149 should be deleted
altogether (as against the interference with respect to four question nos., i.e 69, 98, 107 and 111).
The appellants in civil appeals arising out of SLP(C) 30109/2016, on the other hand, urge that
answers to question nos. 61, 82, 119, 124, 125 and 135 have to be corrected, and the revised merit list
should be published on the basis of such corrected result. The BSSC, in its appeal arising out of
SLP(C) Nos. 23202-04/2015, on the other hand, urges that after the judgment of the learned single
judge, appointments were made since the grievance of the writ petitioners had been substantially
mitigated. It was in the context of appeals preferred by private respondents (some of whom are
before this Court) who found that their names were out of zone of consideration, that the Division
Bench delivered the impugned judgment.
9. It is submitted that the directions in the impugned judgment, which include those requiring the
accommodation of candidates who were to come in the merit list as against the vacancies available
in the cadre without disturbing appointments already made, is violative of well-established and
settled principles of service law. It is highlighted that if the impugned directions are to be complied
with, there would be several complications inasmuch as the recommendations for 3285 vacancies
were against 21 different categories of posts many of which require additional qualifications. This, it
is urged would also include creation of supernumerary post.
10. After hearing learned counsel for the parties, this Court had issued notice on 30.10.2015. In the
meanwhile, on 28.09.2015 the BSSC was asked to work out the judgment in terms of the directions
contained to show the likely results.
11. The Court had on 25.09.2019 passed the following order:
“Having heard learned Senior Counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the
Bihar Public Service Commission should appoint an Expert Committee consisting of
three members in order to determine what is the correct answer to the questions
which are appended as part of this order. The Expert Committee to be appointed
within a period of two weeks from today. The Expert Committee will then submit its
report in a sealed cover to this Court within a period of four weeks from the date on
which the Committee is formed. The Expert Committee is left with the discretion to
co-opt persons of their choice in assisting them.
Representations of parties to be submitted within a period of two weeks from today
so that the Committee may consider them as and when it is constituted.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
4

List after six weeks.”
12. The questions which were referred to the Committee of Experts, extracted in a Tabular Form as
part of the order of 25.09.2019 is set out below:
S.No.                       QUESTIONS WITH FOUR OPTIONS
1.    61. The Primary Product of Photosynthesis is:
      (A) Citric Acid      (B) Glucose         (C) Starch   (D) Maltose
2. 69. Which technique has been possible only after development of recombinant DNA Technology:
(A) DNA Fingerprinting (B) Monoclonal antibody production (C) Fermentation (D)
Vaccination
3. 82. The largest beach in India is in (A) Kerala (B) Goa (C) Tamil Nadu (D) West Bengal
4. 98. 2 x (3+4) is equal to:
      (A) (3 x 4) +2            (B) (2 x 4) + 3         (C) (3 x 2) + 4           (D) (2
      x 4)
S.No.                      QUESTIONS WITH FOUR OPTIONS
5. 107. Which term comes next in the series YEB, WFD, UHG, SKL?
(A) QGL (B) TOL (C) QNL (D) QOL
6. 111. If dust is called air, air is called fire, fire is called water, water is called colour, colour is called
rain and rain is called dust, then where do fish live?
      (A) Fire          (B) Water       (C) Colour        (D) Dust
7.    119. Arrange in the logical sequence 1) Butterfly 2) Cocoon 3) Egg               4
      (A) 1,3,4,2 (B) 1,4,3,2 (C) 2,4,1,3 (D) 3,4,2,1
8. 124. Given the statements - “No fruit is tree. All flowers are trees”, which one of the following is
correct?
(A) No fruit is flower (B) Some trees are flowers (C) All flowers are fruits (D) None of these
9. 125. Given the statements: All windows are doors and no door is wall.
(A) No window is wall (B) No wall is door (C) Some windows are walls (D) None of these.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
5

10. 135. How many minimum steps are necessary to change the word ‘SLEEP’ into ‘DREAM’?
You have to change one letter at a time and all changes should result in a meaningful word.
(A) 5 (B) 4 (C) 6 (D) 7
13. The report of the Committee of four Experts - Dr. S.K. Srivastava, Professor (Retired), PG Deptt.
of Zoology, Patna University, Patna & Former Vice Chancellor, Patna University, Patna; Dr. L.N.
Ram, Professor (Retired) PG Deptt. of Geography, Patna University, Patna & Former Vice
Chancellor, Patna University, Patna; Dr. Binod Kumar Pandey, Prof. & Head, PG Deptt. of Statistics,
Patna University, Patna and Dr. Balgangadhar Prasad, Professor (Retired), PG Deptt. of
Mathematics, Patna University, Patna & Co-opted Member, was set out in the common report dated
04.11.2019. The summary of the extract (of the answers to the questions) is set out below:
“The answer to the question by the Expert Committee against the order dated
25.09.2019 passed by Hon’ble Supreme Court in the SLP (C) No. 23202-23204/2015
with SLP (C) No. 29764- 29765/2015, SLP (C) No. 30109/2016 is below:
            Srl. No.                    Q. No.              Correct Answer
            1.                          61                        B
            2.                          69                        A
            3.                          82                        C
            4.                          98                        D
            5.                          107                 No option is correct
            6.                          111                       D
            7.                          119                       D
            8.                          124                       A
            9.                          125                 Two options are correct
            10.                         135                       C
            The explanation is given on separate pages.”
14. The report also contains detailed reasoning in justification of the answers,
determined to be correct according to the experts. The detailed reasoning too is in a
common document, prepared unanimously by four experts.
15. It is argued on behalf of the BSSC that the process of selection in the present case
is very complex as altogether 3285 vacancies in 21 posts requiring different
qualifications under various departments were notified, and recommendations had
been sent by the commission long ago in the year 2013, in compliance with the
judgment passed in the writ petition. The recommendations were made on the basis
of merit cum choice and suitability of a candidate for a particular post.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
6

16. It is thus argued that any modification in the result, in compliance with the order
passed in the impugned judgment or in terms of the report of the committee, would
result in administrative chaos as well as in “a tsunami of litigation”. The exercise
would drastically alter the final result, and not only a large number of candidates
recommended, selected and appointed would be ousted but it would also result in
alteration in service and inter-se seniority position of a large number of candidates
already appointed and working for the past six years. It is stated that even confining
the result to the candidates who were in litigation before the High Court or this court
will not help, as candidates who had not claimed revision of result will, on the
principles of parity, claim appointment and those already appointed will claim
change in services as per their revised merit position and /or inter-se seniority in the
services.
17. It is submitted that initially this court by order dated 28.09.2015 directed BSSC to
work out the impugned judgment and show the likely result therein. Pursuant to that
order, the BSSC filed additional affidavits dated 24.09.2015 and 28.10.2015. After
considering them, this court by its order dated 31.10.2015 issued notice and stayed
the impugned judgment. The effect of change of result could well be anticipated from
the following data indicated in the two additional affidavits (with regard to only four
questions):
(a) 249 candidates will have to be removed from service and similar number of
candidates will be eligible for appointment.
(b) If 249 candidates are to be retained, as directed by the High Court, then to give
appointment to 249 new candidates and to maintain reservation roster, 688
additional posts will be required.
(c) It is submitted that this will further result in change of posts/services of 1162
candidates already appointed and if they have to be retained at their old posts, then a
total of 3362 posts will be required.
18. It is argued that now if the recommendation of the committee of experts is implemented, then
around 3000 to 6000 additional posts, in addition to those already advertised, would be required to
be created to absorb the effect of alteration of result. It is urged that to avoid litigation and
administrative chaos, in the light of the judgment of this court in Ran Vijay Singh vs State of UP2, it
may be directed that the result published, recommendation sent and appointments made on the
basis of the judgment of the learned single judge should not be interfered with. In Ran Vijay Singh
(supra), this court held that:
“31. On our part we may add that sympathy or compassion does not play any role in
the matter of directing or not directing revaluation of an answer sheet. If an error is
committed by the examination authority, the complete body of candidates suffers.
The entire examination process does not deserve to be derailed only because some
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
7

candidates are disappointed or dissatisfied or perceive some injustice having been
caused to them by an erroneous question or an erroneous answer. All candidates
suffer equally, though some might suffer more but that cannot be helped since
mathematical precision is not always possible. This Court has shown one way out of
an impasse
--- exclude the suspect or offending question.” (2018) 2 SCC 357
19. The tabular comparative statement for the answers according to the experts appointed under
directions of this court, and the relative claim of the candidates, is extracted below:
Tabular comparative statement of the results of disputed questions S.No. Questions
which are in issue BSSC’s SJ DB SC Candidates opinion experts claim
1. 61. The primary product of (B) (B) (B) (B) (C) Photosynthesis is (Pg. 255) (Pg.42)
(A) Citric Acid (B) Glucose (C)Starch (D) Maltose
2. 69. Which technique has been possible (D) (D) (A) (A) (A) only after development
of recombinant (Pg. 190) (Pg. 43) DNA technology:
(A) DNA Fingerprinting (B) Monoclonal antibody production (C)Fermentation (D)
Vaccination
3. 82. The largest beach in India is in Delete Delete Delete (C) (C) (A) Kerala (B) Goa
(C)Tamil Nadu (D) (Pg. 248) (Pg.44) West Bengal
4. 98. 2 x (3+4) is equal to: (A&D) (A&D) (D) (D) (A &D) (A) (3x4)+2 (B) (2x4)+3
(Pg.190 (Pg.45) (C)(3x2)+4 (D) (2x3)+(2x4) & 242)
5. 107. Which term comes next in the series (D) (D) Delete( Delete Delete YEB, WFD,
UHG, SKL? (Pg. 257) Pg.46) (A) QGL (B) TOL (C)QNL (D) QOL
6. 111. If dust is called air, air is called fire, Delete Delete (C) (D) (C) fire is called
water, water is called colour, (Pg.194, (Pg.47) colour is called rain and rain is called
243 & dust, then where do fish live? 256) (A) Fire (B) Water (C)Colour (D) Dust
7. 119. Arrange in logical sequence: 1) (A&D) A&D Not (D) (A&D) Butterfly 2) Cocoon
3) Egg 4) Worm (Pg.242) pressed (Pg.95 Gr.I) (A) 1,3,4,2 (B) 1,4,3,2 (C) 2,4,1,3 (D)
3,4,2,1
8. 124. Given the statements - “No fruit is (A) (A) (A) (A) (A&B) tree. All flowers are
trees”, which one of (Pg. 257) Pg.47) (Pg. 95 Gr. J) the following is correct?
(A) No fruit is flower (B) Some trees are flowers (C)All flowers are fruits (D) None of these.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
8

9. 125. Given the statements: All windows (A) (A) (A) (A&B) (A&B) are doors and no door is wall.
(Pg.257) (Pg.48) Delete (Pg. 96 Gr.K) (A) No window is wall (B) No wall is door (C)Some windows
are walls (D) None of these.
10. 135. How many minimum steps are (A) Not Not (C) (B) necessary to change the word ‘SLEEP’
pressed pressed into ‘DREAM’?
You have to change one letter at a time and all changes should result in a meaningful word.
(A) 5 (B) 4 (C)6 (D) 7 It is evident that the experts appointed by this court have recommended that
two questions (at S. Nos. 5 and 9) should be deleted for the purpose of evaluation, because of
defective or ambiguous (i.e. more than one) answers. It is a matter of record that one set of
petitioners approached the High Court, complaining of arbitrariness in the declaration of results, as
a consequence of defective evaluation. Before they had approached the court, the BSSC had
undertaken the exercise of submitting the results to expert evaluation, and then revised the key
answers, deleting (from consideration) certain questions. The exercise was undertaken again by the
BSSC, which complied with the single judge’s directions. As a result of that exercise, several
candidates were appointed. The Division bench, regrettably, in the context of appeals by candidates
who had been originally selected, who questioned the decision of the board to have the
re-evaluation, questioned the revised merit list. Others who had approached the Division Bench
were those who were excluded from selection, after the single judge’s decision.
20. This court reiterates that the scope of judicial review under Article 226 in matters concerning
evaluation of candidates-particularly, for purpose of recruitment to public services is narrow. The
previous decisions of the court 3;
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and Another v. Paritosh
Bhupeshkumar Sheth & Ors (1984) 4 SCC 27; Pramod Kumar Srivastava v. Chairman, Bihar Public
Service Commission, Patna & Ors. (2004) 6 SCC 714; Board of Secondary Education v. Pravas have
constantly underscored that in the absence of any provision for re- evaluation of answer sheets,
judicial review should be rarely exercised - preferably under exceptional circumstances. A three
judge Bench of this court, in Pramod Kumar Srivastava (supra) held as follows:
"Under the relevant rules of the Commission, there is no provision wherein a
candidate may be entitled to ask for re-evaluation of his answer-book. There is a
provision for scrutiny only wherein the answer-books are seen for the purpose of
checking whether all the answers given by a candidate have been examined and
whether there has been any mistake in the totalling of marks of each question and
noting them correctly on the first cover page of the answer-book. There is no dispute
that after scrutiny no mistake was found in the marks awarded to the appellant in the
General Science paper. In the absence of any provision for re-evaluation of
answer-books in the relevant rules, no candidate in an examination has got any right
whatsoever to claim or ask for re- evaluation of his marks."
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
9

In Khushboo Shrivastava (supra) too, a similar view was echoed:
"7. We find that a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Pramod Kumar Srivastava v.
Chairman, Bihar Public Service Commission, Patna and Ors. (supra) has clearly held
relying on Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education
and Anr. v. Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth and Ors. (supra) that in the absence of any
provision for the re-evaluation of answers books in the relevant rules, no candidate in
an examination has any right to claim or ask for re-evaluation of his marks. The
decision in Pramod Kumar Srivastava v. Chairman, Bihar Public Service Commission,
Patna and Ors. (supra) was followed by another three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Board of Secondary Education v. Pravas Ranjan Panda and Anr. (2004) 13 SCC 383
in which the direction of the High Court for re-
evaluation of answers books of all the examinees securing 90% or above marks was held to be
unsustainable in law because the regulations of the Board of Secondary Education, Orissa, which
Ranjan Panda (2004) 13 SCC 383; Himachal Pradesh Public Service Commission v. Mukesh Thakur
& Anr (2010) 6 SCC 759; Gangadhara Palo v. Revenue Divisional Officer & Anr. (2011) 4 SCC 602;
Central Board of Secondary Education Through Secretary, All India Pre-Medical/Pre-Dental
Entrance Examination & Ors. v. Khushboo Shrivastava & Ors (2014) 14 SCC 523 and Ran Vijay
Singh & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors (2018) 2 SCC 357.
conducted the examination, did not make any provision for re- evaluation of answers books in the
rules.
8. In the present case, the bye-laws of the All India Pre- Medical/Pre-Dental Entrance Examination,
2007 conducted by the CBSE did not provide for re-examination or re-evaluation of answers sheets.
Hence, the Appellants could not have allowed such re- examination or re-evaluation on the
representation of the Respondent No. 1 and accordingly rejected the representation of the
Respondent No. 1 for re-examination/re-evaluation of her answer sheets. The Respondent No. 1,
however, approached the High Court and the learned Single Judge of the High Court directed
production of answer sheets on the Respondent No. 1 depositing a sum of Rs. 25,000/- and when
the answer sheets were produced, the learned Single Judge himself compared the answers of the
Respondent No. 1 with the model answers produced by the CBSE and awarded two marks for
answers given by the Respondent No. 1 in the Chemistry and Botany, but declined to grant any relief
to the Respondent No. 1. When Respondent No. 1 filed the LPA before the Division Bench of the
High Court, the Division Bench also examined the two answers of the Respondent No. 1 in
Chemistry and Botany and agreed with the findings of the learned Single Judge that the Respondent
No. 1 deserved two additional marks for the two answers. In our considered opinion, neither the
learned Single Judge nor the Division Bench of the High Court could have substituted his/its own
views for that of the examiners and awarded two additional marks to the Respondent No. 1 for the
two answers in exercise of powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution as these
are purely academic matters. This Court in Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher
Secondary Education and Anr. v. Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth and Ors. (supra) has observed:
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
10

... As has been repeatedly pointed out by this Court, the Court should be extremely
reluctant to substitute its own views as to what is wise, prudent and proper in relation
to academic matters in preference to those formulated by professional men
possessing technical expertise and rich experience of actual day-to-day working of
educational institutions and the departments controlling them. It will be wholly
wrong for the Court to make a pedantic and purely idealistic approach to the
problems of this nature, isolated from the actual realities and grass root problems
involved in the working of the system and unmindful of the consequences which
would emanate if a purely idealistic view as opposed to a pragmatic one were to be
propounded....
9. We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge and
the Division Bench of the High Court and dismiss the writ petition. There shall be no order as to
costs. We are informed that the first Respondent was admitted to the MBBS Course subsequently. If
so, her admission in the MBBS Course will not be affected."
21. The decision in Ran Vijay Singh (supra f.n.2), after a review of all previous decisions, held as
follows:
"30. The law on the subject is therefore, quite clear and we only propose to highlight
a few significant conclusions. They are: (i) If a statute, Rule or Regulation governing
an examination permits the re- evaluation of an answer sheet or scrutiny of an
answer sheet as a matter of right, then the authority conducting the examination may
permit it;
(ii) If a statute, Rule or Regulation governing an examination does not permit
re-evaluation or scrutiny of an answer sheet (as distinct from prohibiting it) then the
Court may permit re- evaluation or scrutiny only if it is demonstrated very clearly,
without any "inferential process of reasoning or by a process of rationalisation" and
only in rare or exceptional cases that a material error has been committed;
(iii) The Court should not at all re-evaluate or scrutinize the answer sheets of a
candidate-it has no expertise in the matter and academic matters are best left to
academics;
(iv) The Court should presume the correctness of the key answers and proceed on
that assumption; and (v) In the event of a doubt, the benefit should go to the
examination authority rather than to the candidate.
XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX
32. It is rather unfortunate that despite several decisions of this Court, some of which
have been discussed above, there is interference by the Courts in the result of
examinations. This places the examination authorities in an unenviable position
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
11

where they are under scrutiny and not the candidates. Additionally, a massive and
sometimes prolonged examination exercise concludes with an air of uncertainty.
While there is no doubt that candidates put in a tremendous effort in preparing for
an examination, it must not be forgotten that even the examination authorities put in
equally great efforts to successfully conduct an examination. The enormity of the task
might reveal some lapse at a later stage, but the Court must consider the internal
checks and balances put in place by the examination authorities before interfering
with the efforts put in by the candidates who have successfully participated in the
examination and the examination authorities. The present appeals are a classic
example of the consequence of such interference where there is no finality to the
result of the examinations even after a lapse of eight years. Apart from the
examination authorities even the candidates are left wondering about the certainty or
otherwise of the result of the examination-whether they have passed or not; whether
their result will be approved or disapproved by the Court; whether they will get
admission in a college or University or not; and whether they will get recruited or not.
This unsatisfactory situation does not work to anybody's advantage and such a state
of uncertainty results in confusion being worse confounded. The overall and larger
impact of all this is that public interest suffers."
22. Given the clear declaration of law in the judgments of this court, we are of the opinion that the
unilateral exercise of re-valuation undertaken by the High Court (both by the single judge and the
Division Bench) has not solved, but rather contributed to the chaos. No rule or regulation was
shown by any party during the hearing, which justified the approach that was adopted. The BSSC, in
our opinion, acted correctly in the first instance, in referring the answers to a panel of experts. If
there were justifiable doubts about the recommendations of that panel, the least that should have
been done, was to require the BSSC to refer the disputed or doubtful questions to another expert
panel. That was not done; the “corrections” indicated by the single judge were accepted by the BSSC;
several candidates who made it to the select list freshly drawn up pursuant to his directions, were
appointed. The Division Bench, thereafter undertook the entire exercise afresh, compounding the
matter further by not referring the disputed questions to any panel of experts. We are left reiterating
the lament, (made in Ran Vijay) that the High Court’s interference has not resulted in finality “to the
result of the examinations” despite a long lapse of time. There is an air of uncertainty about the
entire selection - nay, the entire cadre, because the inter se seniority of selected (and appointed)
candidates is in a state of flux.
23. As noticed earlier, the committee of experts appointed by this court has made its
recommendations. Since the exercise indicates that the previous re- evaluations (by the single judge
and the division bench- both made in the absence of expert recommendations) are not correct or
accurate, as an exceptional case, we propose to accept them. This approach of ours is in tune with a
recent judgment of this court in Pranav Verma v. Registrar General of High Court of Punjab &
Haryana4, where the court accepted the recommendations of a single member committee and
directed revision of results in a public examination, relating to recruitment of candidates to judicial
service.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
12

24. As a result of the above discussion, the BSSC is directed to evaluate and publish the results
afresh, in the light of the recommendations and report of the experts (constituted by this court)
subject to care being taken by the BSSC and the Govt. of Bihar, not to disturb appointments made
previously pursuant to the directions of the single judge. In case the number of selected candidates
(on the basis of the revised result) exceeds the vacancies available as on the last date indicated for
consideration (in the concerned recruitment or recruitments), the state of Bihar would
accommodate the excess numbers in the relevant cadres as against future vacancies arising till
31.12.2019. This court is hereby making these directions to put a quietus on the dispute, in exercise
of its extraordinary powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
2019 SCC OnLine SC 1610
25. For the foregoing reasons, the impugned judgment of the Patna High Court, as well as the
judgment of the single judge are hereby set aside; the appeals are disposed of in the above terms
without order on costs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J  [ R O H I N T O N  F A L I  N A R I M A N ]
.......................................................J [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] New Delhi, May 06, 2020.
Bihar Staff Selection Commission . vs Arun Kumar on 6 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96372437/
13
