C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5747, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
818
Author: Hemant Gupta
Bench: Ajay Rastogi, Hemant Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                                                   REPOR
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3441 OF 2020
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 12381 OF 2020)
                                           (DIARY NO. 46087 OF 2019)
                      C. BRIGHT                                                  .....AP
                                                              VERSUS
                      THE DISTRICT COLLECTOR & ORS.                            .....RESP
                                                 JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1. The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the Division Bench of the Kerala High
Court of 19.7.2019, whereby it was held that Section 14 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 1 mandating the District Magistrate
to deliver possession of a secured asset within 30 days, extendable to an aggregate of 60 days upon
reasons recorded in writing, is a directory provision. The High Court held as under:
1 For short “the Act” “18. The primary question in these Writ Petitions, namely,
whether the time limits in section 14 of the SARFAESI Act are mandatory or directory
should be answered in light of the principles enumerated above.
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
1

As stated above, the object and purpose of the said time limit is to ensure that such applications are
decided expeditiously so as to enable secured creditors to take physical possession quickly and
realise their dues. Moreover, as stated earlier, the consequences of non-compliance with the time
limit are not specified and the sequitur thereof would be that the district collector/district
magistrate concerned would not be divested of jurisdiction upon expiry of the time limit. In this
connection, it is also pertinent to bear in mind that if the “consequences of non-compliance” test is
applied, the borrower, guarantor or lessee, as the case may be, is not adversely affected or
prejudiced, in any manner, whether such applications are decided in 60, 70 or 80 days. On the other
hand, the secured creditor is adversely affected if the provision is construed as mandatory and not
directory in as much as it would delay the process of taking physical possession of assets instead of
expediting such process by entailing the filing of another application for such purpose. For all these
reasons, the time limit stipulation in the amended Section 14 of the SARFAESI Act is directory and
not mandatory.”
2. The High Court examined Section 14 of the Act as amended, which reads thus:
“14. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to assist secured creditor in
taking possession of secured asset.- (1) xx xx xx Provided, further that on receipt of
the affidavit from the Authorised Officer, the District Magistrate or the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, shall, after satisfying the contents of the
affidavit pass suitable orders for the purpose of taking possession of the secured asset
within a period of thirty days from the date of application:
Provided also that if no order is passed by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or
District Magistrate within the said period of thirty days for reasons beyond his
control, he may, after recording reasons in writing for the same, pass the order within
such period not exceeding in the aggregate sixty days.”
3. The Act was enacted in the year 2002 for reasons that the legal framework relating to commercial
transactions had not kept pace with the changing commercial practices. Further, financial sector
reforms resulted in a slow pace of recovery of defaulting loans and mounting level of
non-performing assets of banking and financial institutions. The objectives behind the Act,
recognised that unlike international banks, banks and financial institutions in India, did not have
power to take possession of securities and sell them. The provisions of the Act were upheld by this
Court except that of sub- section (2) of Section 17 which provided that the Debt Recovery Tribunal
shall not entertain an appeal preferred by a borrower unless seventy-five per cent of the amount
claimed has been deposited before it2. Thereafter, the question as to whether the withdrawal of an
application filed under the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 19933 is a
condition precedent to take recourse to the Act was examined by this Court 4. This Court observed
that when Civil Courts failed to expeditiously 2 Mardia Chemicals Ltd. & Ors. v. Union of India &
Ors., (2004) 4 SCC 311 3 For short “DRT Act” 4 Transcore v. Union of India and Another, (2008) 1
SCC 125 decide suits filed by the banks, the DRT Act was enacted, however it did not provide for
assignment of debts to Securitisation compa- nies. The Act which was enacted thereafter in 2002
sought to fur- ther empower the banks and facilitate the recovery of debt. It pro- ceeded on the basis
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
2

that once the liability of a borrower to repay crystallises; it becomes due and that on account of
delay, the ac- count of such borrower becomes substandard and non-performing.
4. Recently, this Court noticed the objects and reasons for amending the Act in 2014 and held that
the Magistrate takes possession of the asset and “forwards” such asset to the secured creditor under
Section 14(1); the management of the business of a borrower can actually be taken over under
Section 15 of the Act and that Section 13(4) must be read in the light of Sections 14 and 15. These are
separate and distinct modes of exercise of powers by a secured creditor under the Act5.
5. Section 14 of the Act, as originally enacted, empowered the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the
District Magistrate to take posses- sion of such assets and documents relating to secured assets.
Later, by the Central Act No. 1 of 2013, which came into force on 15.1.2013, a proviso to sub-section
(1) of Section 14 of the Act was inserted contemplating that upon filing of an affidavit, in the format
mentioned therein, by an Authorised Officer of the secured 5 Hindon Forge Private Limited & Anr.
v. State of Uttar Pradesh through District Magistrate, Ghaziabad & Anr. (2019) 2 SCC 198 creditor,
the District Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magis-
trate shall pass suitable orders for the purpose of taking posses- sion of the secured assets. It is,
thereafter, the Act was amended vide Central Act 44 of 2016, which came into force on 1.9.2016.
6. The argument of Mr. Khan, learned counsel for the appellant, is that the proviso mandating the
District Magistrate to record rea- sons, if the order is not passed within 30 days, in order to avail an
extended period of a total 60 days, shows that the provision is mandatory. If the District Magistrate
is not able to take decision within 60 days, the secured creditor has to find its remedy else- where
and not in terms of Section 14 of the Act. It is contended that the proviso mandates the District
Magistrate to pass an order within 30 days as the word “shall” is used in first part of the pro- viso.
Thus, the time limit provided is unambiguous and by corollary the provision is mandatory. Reliance
is placed on the judgments of this Court in Union of India & Ors. v. A.K. Pandey6, Harshad
Govardhan Sondagar v. International Assets Reconstruc- tion Company Limited & Ors.7, Dipak
Babaria & Anr. v. State of Gujarat & Ors.8, in support of his arguments that the use of expression
“shall” and the language of the second proviso in fixing the time limit of 60 days after recording of
reasons makes the pro- 6 (2009) 10 SCC 552 7 (2014) 6 SCC 1 8 (2014) 3 SCC 502 vision mandatory.
If the District Magistrate has not been able to take possession, the proceedings before him abates.
7. A well settled rule of interpretation of the statutes is that the use of the word “shall” in a statute,
does not necessarily mean that in every case it is mandatory that unless the words of the statute are
literally followed, the proceeding or the outcome of the proceeding, would be invalid. It is not always
correct to say that if the word “may” has been used, the statute is only permissive or directory in the
sense that non-compliance with those provisions will not render the proceeding invalid9 and that
when a statute uses the word “shall”, prima facie, it is mandatory, but the Court may ascertain the
real intention of the legislature by carefully at- tending to the whole scope of the statute 10. The
principle of literal construction of the statute alone in all circumstances without ex- amining the
context and scheme of the statute may not serve the purpose of the statute11.
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
3

8. The question as to whether, a time limit fixed for a public officer to perform a public duty is
directory or mandatory has been examined earlier by the Courts as well. A question arose before the
Privy Council in respect of irregularities in the preliminary proceedings for constituting a jury panel.
The Municipality was 9 State of U.P. v. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, AIR 1957 SC 912 10 State of U.P.
& Ors. v. Babu Ram Upadhya, AIR 1961 SC 751 11 Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance
and Investment Co. Ltd. & Ors. , (1987) 1 SCC 424 expected to revise the list of qualified persons but
the jury was drawn from the old list as the Sheriff neglected to revise the same. It was in these
circumstances, the decision of the jury drawn from the old list became the subject matter of
consideration by the Privy Council. It was thus held that it would cause greater public inconvenience
if it were held that neglecting to observe the provisions of the statute made the verdicts of all juries
taken from the list ipso facto null and void so that no jury trials could be held until a duly revised list
had been prepared12.
9. The Constitution Bench of this Court held that when the provisions of a statute relate to the
performance of a public duty and the case is such that to hold acts done in neglect of this duty as
null and void, would cause serious general inconvenience or injustice to persons who have no
control over those entrusted with the duty, the practice of the courts should be to hold such
provisions as directory13. In a seven Bench judgment, this Court was consid- ering as to whether the
power of the Returning Officer to reject ballot papers is mandatory or directory. The Court
examined well- recognised rules of construction to observe that a statute should be construed as
directory if it relates to the performance of public duties, or if the conditions prescribed therein have
to be per- 12 Montreal Street Railway Company v. Normandin, AIR 1917 PC 142 13 Dattatraya
Moreshwar Pangarkar v. State of Bombay & Ors., AIR 1952 SC 181 formed by persons other than
those on whom the right is con-
ferred14.
10. In a judgment reported as Remington Rand of India Ltd. v.
Workmen15, Section 17 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 came up for consideration. The
argument raised was that the time limit of 30 days of publication of award by the labour court is
mandatory. This Court held that though Section 17 is mandatory, the time limit to publish the award
within 30 days is directory inter-alia for the reason that the non-publication of the award within the
period of thirty days does not entail any penalty.
11. In T.V. Usman v. Food Inspector, Tellicherry Municipality, Tellicherry16, the time period during
which report of the analysis of a sample under Rule 7(3) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Rules, 1955 was to be given, was held to be directory as there was no time-limit prescribed within
which the prosecution had to be instituted. When there was no such limit prescribed then there was
no valid reason for holding the period of 45 days as mandatory. Of course, that does not mean that
the Public Analyst can ignore the time-limit prescribed under the rules. He must in all cases try to
comply with the time-limit. But if there is some delay, in a given case, there is no reason to hold that
the very report is void and, on that basis, to hold that even prosecution cannot be launched. 14 Hari
Vishnu Kamath v. Ahmad Ishaque & Ors.AIR 1955 SC 233 15 AIR 1968 SC 224 16 (1994) 1 SCC 754
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
4

12. This Court distinguished between failure of an individual to act in a given time frame and the
time frame provided to a public authority, for the purposes of determining whether a provision was
mandatory or directory, when this Court held that it is a well- settled principle that if an act is
required to be performed by a private person within a specified time, the same would ordinarily be
mandatory but when a public functionary is required to perform a public function within a
time-frame, the same will be held to be directory unless the consequences therefor are specified17.
13. In P.T. Rajan v. T.P.M. Sahir & Ors.18, this Court examined the affect of non-publication of final
electoral rolls before the time of acceptance of nomination papers. The Court held as under:
“48. Furthermore, even if the statute specifies a time for publication of the electoral
roll, the same by itself could not have been held to be mandatory. Such a provision
would be directory in nature. It is a well- settled principle of law that where a
statutory functionary is asked to perform a statutory duty within the time prescribed
therefor, the same would be directory and not mandatory. (See Shiveshwar Prasad
Sinha v. District Magistrate of Monghyr [AIR 1966 Pat 144 : ILR 45 Pat 436 (FB)] ,
Nomita Chowdhury v. State of W.B. [(1999) 2 Cal LJ 21] and Garbari Union Coop.
Agricultural Credit Society Ltd. v. Swapan Kumar Jana [(1997) 1 CHN 189] .)”
14. A recent Constitution Bench held that the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act granting 30
days’ time to file response by 17 Nasiruddin & Ors. v. Sita Ram Agarwal, (2003) 2 SCC 577 18 (2003)
8 SCC 498 the opposite party or such extended period not exceeding 15 days is mandatory as the
object of the statute is for the benefit and protection of the consumer. It observed that such act had
been enacted to provide expeditious disposal of consumer disputes. In this case, an individual was
called upon to file his written statement in contradiction for a pubic authority to decide the issue
before it19.
15. The Full Bench of Patna High Court in Shiveshwar Prasad Sinha was examining the provisions of
the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947 which permitted a Government
servant in occupation of a building as a tenant to serve a notice of 15 days on the landlord and the
District Magistrate of his intention to vacate the premises. The High Court held that the
Government servant to whom the house was allotted had no control over the District Magistrate,
therefore, the time limit required by the provision was not mandatory.
16. A Single Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court 20 examined the provisions of Section 14 of the
Act as amended. The Court held that the second proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 14 was inserted
in order to ensure that Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate pass the order within a
stipulated time. The 19 New India Assurance Company Limited v. Hilli Multipurpose Cold Storage
Private Limited, (2020) 5 SCC 757 20 In Manish Makhija v. Central Bank of India & Ors., 2018 SCC
OnLine MP 553 Bank/secured creditor has no control over the District Magistrate.
After filing an application under sub-section (1) of Section 14, the Bank had no authority to compel
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to pass orders within reasonable time. The
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
5

legislature, in order to bind the said authorities, inserted the said proviso. Thus, the basic object and
purpose was to fix a time limit for the concerned Magistrate to pass an order and not to give a clean
chit to an unscrupulous borrower/guarantor, who had not repaid the debts.
17. Now, coming to the Judgments referred to by Mr. Khan. In A.K. Pandey, the respondent was not
provided 96 hours of interval time as contemplated by the relevant rules, before commencing a trial
by the Court Martial. This Court held that such proceedings were vitiated as the purpose of the time
limit was that before the accused is called upon for trial, he must be given adequate time to give a
cool thought to the charge or charges for which he is to be tried, decide about his defence and ask
the authorities, if necessary, to take reasonable steps in procuring the attendance of his witnesses.
He may even decide not to defend the charge(s) but before he decides his line of action, he must be
given clear ninety- six hours.
18. Harshad Govardhan Sondagar was a case where the person in possession claimed tenancy rights
in the premises as well as a protected tenancy, being a tenant prior to creation of a mortgage. It was
held that the remedy of an aggrieved person against a decision of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a
District Magistrate lay only before the High Court. However, after the aforesaid judgment was
rendered on 3.4.2014, the Act had been amended and sub-section 4A was inserted in Section 17 with
effect from 1.9.2016. This provided a right to move an application to the Debts Recovery Tribunal by
a person who claimed tenancy or leasehold rights.
19. Dipak Babaria was a case wherein agricultural land was sold by an agriculturist to another
person for industrial purposes. Permission was to be granted by the Collector for the same. In these
circumstances, it was held that when a statute provides for a thing to be done in a particular manner
then it should be done in that manner itself. Such proposition does not arise for consideration in the
present case.
20. The Act was enacted to provide a machinery for empowering banks and financial institutions, so
that they may have the power to take possession of secured assets and to sell them. The DRT Act was
first enacted to streamline the recovery of public dues but the proceedings under the said Act have
not given desirous re- sults. Therefore, the Act in question was enacted. This Court in Mardia
Chemical, Transcore and Hindon Forge Private Lim- ited has held that the purpose of the Act
pertains to the speedy recovery of dues, by banks and financial institutions. The true in- tention of
the Legislature is a determining factor herein. Keeping the objective of the Act in mind, the time
limit to take action by the District Magistrate has been fixed to impress upon the author- ity to take
possession of the secured assets. However, inability to take possession within time limit does not
render the District Mag- istrate Functus Officio. The secured creditor has no control over the
District Magistrate who is exercising jurisdiction under Section 14 of the Act for public good to
facilitate recovery of public dues. Therefore, Section 14 of the Act is not to be interpreted literally
without considering the object and purpose of the Act. If any other interpretation is placed upon the
language of Section 14, it would be contrary to the purpose of the Act. The time limit is to instill a
confidence in creditors that the District Magistrate will make an at- tempt to deliver possession as
well as to impose a duty on the Dis- trict Magistrate to make an earnest effort to comply with the
man- date of the statute to deliver the possession within 30 days and for reasons to be recorded
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
6

within 60 days. In this light, the remedy under Section 14 of the Act is not rendered redundant if the
Dis- trict Magistrate is unable to handover the possession. The District Magistrate will still be
enjoined upon, the duty to facilitate delivery of possession at the earliest.
21. Even though, this Court in United Bank of India v. Satyawati Tondon & Ors.21 held that in cases
relating to recovery of the dues of banks, financial institutions and secured creditors, stay granted by
the High Court would have serious adverse impact on the financial health of such
bodies/institutions, which will ultimately prove detrimental to the economy of the nation.
Therefore, the High Court should be extremely careful and circumspect in exercising its discretion to
grant stay in such matters. Hindon Forge Private Limited has held that the rem- edy of an aggrieved
person by a secured creditor under the Act is by way of an application before the Debts Recovery
Tribunal, how- ever, borrowers and other aggrieved persons are invoking the ju- risdiction of the
High Court under Articles 226 or 227 of the Consti- tution of India without availing the alternative
statutory remedy. The Hon’ble High Courts are well aware of the limitations in exer- cising their
jurisdiction when affective alternative remedies are available, but a word of caution would be still
necessary for the High Courts that interim orders should generally not be passed without hearing
the secured creditor as interim orders defeat the very purpose of expeditious recovery of public
money. 21 (2010) 8 SCC 110
22. Thus, we do not find any error in the order passed by the High Court. Consequently, the appeal
is dismissed.
.............................................J. (L. NAGESWARA RAO) .............................................J. (HEMANT
GUPTA) .............................................J. (AJAY RASTOGI) NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 5, 2020.
C. Bright vs The District Collector on 5 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166859104/
7
