Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 262, (2020) 4 SCALE 431
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: M.R. Shah, Indira Banerjee, Uday Umesh Lalit
                                                          REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS.1863−1864 OF 2020
                              (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos.24819−24820/2019)
          Canara Bank                                         …Appellant
                                          Versus
          P. Selathal and others etc. etc.                    …Respondents
                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order dated
09.11.2017 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in C.R.P.(PD) No. 2586/2013 and
C.R.P.(PD) No. 2587/2013, by which the High Court has dismissed the said revision applications
preferred by the appellant herein – Canara Bank and has confirmed the orders passed by the
learned trial Court dismissing the applications preferred by the appellant herein to reject the
respective plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC, original defendant no.5 –
Canara Bank in O.S. No. 1269/2010, who is original defendant no.6 in O.S. No.233/2011, has
preferred the present appeals.
3. The facts leading to the present appeals in nutshell are as under:
That the appellant – bank sanctioned and granted a term loan of Rs.49,50,000/− to
M/s Coimbatore Hatcheries, a partnership firm in which one Shri Ravichandran and
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
1

G. Suresh Babu were the partners, in the year 1995. That the said loan was secured by
mortgage of immovable property belonging to the said firm and the land situated at
Survey Nos. 472 and 488 of Sanganur Village of one Shri M.C. Kallikutty –
Guarantor. That the land bearing Survey Nos. 472 and 488 of Sanganur Village of one
Shri M.C. Kallikutty – Guarantor is the subject matter of dispute. At this stage, it is
required to be noted that the said Shri M.C. Kallikutty stood as a Guarantor. That the
said Shri M.C. Kallikutty (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Guarantor’) signed
Guarantee Deed dated 28.09.1995 and created equitable mortgage by deposit of Title
Deeds of the disputed lands in question.
3.1 That as the original borrower failed to repay the loan amount due to the
appellant−bank, the appellant−bank filed O.A. No. 489 of 2001 before the Debt
Recovery Tribunal, Chennai in the month of October, 1997 against the principal
borrower, its partners as well as against the Guarantor. That on 31.10.2001, DRT,
Chennai passed an order in O.A. No. 489/2001 to proceed ex−parte against the
Guarantor. That O.A. No. 489/2001 was transferred to DRT, Coimbatore and was re−
numbered as T.A. No. 822/2002. That T.A. No. 822/2002 (previously O.A. No.
489/2001) filed by the appellant−bank came to be decreed by the DRT for
Rs.57,35,770/− with 18% interest per annum in favour of the appellant−bank and
against the principal borrower as well as Guarantor. That a Recovery Certificate
dated 16.09.2003 was issued in favour of the appellant−bank for a sum of
Rs.57,35,770/− with 18% interest per annum.
3.2 That Recovery Officer, DRT, Coimbatore issued a Demand Notice dated
11.11.2003 in R.P. No. 141/2003 to the principal borrower, its partners and the
Guarantor directing them to pay the sum of Rs.1,55,75,443/− as decreed in T.A. No.
822/2002.
That the Guarantor filed a writ petition before the High Court of Madras denying his guarantee and
creation of EMT and sought direction to the Crime Branch−CID to register an FIR and investigate
into the matter. That on directions of the High Court of Madras, FIR No. 152/2010 came to be
registered on 2.11.2005. The CB−CID, Coimbatore filed a final report under Section 173(2) of Cr.P.C.
for the offences under Sections 120B read with 465, 466, 467, 468, 471, 420 and 419 of the IPC
against the partners of the principal borrower and also against one K.V. Roshan Babu, Agricultural
Extension Officer of the appellant – bank. It appears that thereafter the criminal proceedings
against the officer of the bank – Roshan Babu came to be quashed by the High Court vide judgment
and order dated 28.06.2011.
3.3 That in the year 2007 and in pursuance of the Recovery Certificate in favour of the appellant−
bank, the bank auctioned and sold the properties of the partnership firm and recovered Rs.38 lacs.
That thereafter after a period of five years from the date of the order passed by the DRT dated
27.08.2003, the Guarantor filed I.A. No. 1821 of 2008 in the year 2008 for setting aside the ex−
parte decree dated 27.08.2003 before the DRT, Coimbatore. That vide order dated 12.06.2009,
DRT, Coimbatore dismissed the said I.A filed by the Guarantor and refused to condone the delay of
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
2

1337 days in challenging the ex−parte decree dated 27.08.2003 and for condonation of delay of 2392
days in filing the petition to set aside the ex−parte order dated 31.10.2001.
3.4 That thereafter after a period of 15 years from the date of mortgage and after seven years from
the date of the decree dated 27.08.2003 passed by the DRT, the respondents herein filed O.S. No.
1269/2010 and O.S. No. 233/2011 respectively in the Court of learned Second Additional
Subordinate Court, Coimbatore against the Guarantor, principal borrower and its partners and the
appellant−bank for a declaration to declare the order dated 27.08.2003 passed by the DRT in T.A.
No. 822/2002 as non−est, ultra vires, null and void and not binding on the suit property and also
for a consequential permanent injunction restraining the Recovery Officer from interfering with
their peaceful possession and enjoyment of the suit property by taking any action as against the suit
property by way of attachment, sale or otherwise. That in the aforesaid two suits, the appellant−
bank was joined as defendant no.5 in O.S. No. 1269/2010 and defendant no.6 in O.S. No. 233/2011
and was served with the summons/notices of the suits. That the appellant−bank filed I.A.
No.431/2011 in O.S. No. 1269/2010 and I.A. No. 122/2012 in O.S. No. 233/2011 to reject the
respective plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC. It was the case on
behalf of the appellant−bank that in view of the specific bar of jurisdiction under Sections 18 and
20(1) of the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (for short ‘RDDBFI
Act’), the suits are not maintainable and the civil court has no jurisdiction. It was the case on behalf
of the appellant− bank that as per Section 20(1) of the RDDBFI Act, the appeal is provided to Debt
Recovery Appellate Tribunal against the order of DRT and therefore the civil court has no
jurisdiction to entertain the suits challenging the decree passed by the DRT. 3.5 That the said
applications were opposed by the original plaintiffs submitting inter alia that they have purchased
the suit property from the original owner and that they are in possession and enjoyment of the suit
property. It was the case on behalf of the original plaintiffs that the vendor did not create any
equitable mortgage in favour of the bank and the officials of the bank in collusion with the
promoters of the principal borrower created and fabricated equitable mortgage, as though the
original owner, their vendor created a mortgage. It was submitted that on a complaint given by the
Guarantor – Shri M.C. Kallikutty, the original owner of the suit property, an FIR was registered on
02.11.2005 and a charge sheet dated 18.08.,2007 has been filed which is pending. It was alleged that
the bank and promoters of the principal borrower played fraud and obtained decree in the DRT. It
was submitted that the fraud played by the bank and others can be proved only by the civil forum
and the same cannot be decided by the DRT. It was also submitted that the plaintiffs are third
parties and therefore they cannot approach the DRT and the DRAT. Therefore, it was prayed to
dismiss the said applications.
3.6 That the learned trial Court dismissed the said applications and refused to reject the respective
plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC.
3.7 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the orders passed by the learned trial Court dismissing
the aforesaid applications and refusing to reject the respective plaints under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of
the CPC, the appellant−bank preferred two separate revision applications before the High Court. By
the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the said revision
applications and has confirmed the orders passed by the learned trial Court rejecting the
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
3

applications to reject the respective plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC by
observing that the issue of either fraud or impersonation or whether mortgage created by the
Guarantor, vendor of the original plaintiffs, in favour of the bank is legal or not is a matter to be
adjudicated in the civil suits and in criminal case. 3.8 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
impugned common judgment and order passed by the High Court in refusing to reject the respective
plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC, the appellant−bank – original defendant
no. 5 in O.S. No. 1269/2010 and original defendant no.6 in O.S. No. 233/2011 has preferred the
present appeals.
4. Shri Rajesh Kumar, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant−bank has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has materially erred in
rejecting the respective applications and confirming the orders passed by the learned trial Court
rejecting the applications preferred by the appellant−bank and refusing to reject the respective
plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC. It is vehemently submitted by the
learned Advocate that both, the High Court as well as the learned trial Court have not properly
appreciated and/or considered the relevant provisions of RDDBFI Act, more particularly Sections
18, 19 and 20 of the said Act.
4.1 It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant−bank that in
substance the original plaintiffs are challenging the decree passed by the DRT, Coimbatore dated
27.08.2003 passed in T.A. No. 822/2002. It is submitted that under the RDDBFI Act against the
decree passed by the DRT, the remedy of appeal is available under Section 20 of the said Act before
the DRAT. It is submitted that therefore RDDBFI Act being a Special Act, the procedure provided
under the said Act has to be followed. It is submitted that therefore the civil suit challenging the
decree passed by the DRT shall not be maintainable and therefore the case squarely falls within
Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC and therefore the learned trial Court as well as the High Court ought
to have rejected the respective plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC. In
support of the above submission, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant – bank has
heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Punjab National Bank v. O.C. Krishnan
and others, (2001) 6 SCC 569. It is submitted that even in the said decision, as held by this Court,
even the petitions under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India are held to be not
maintainable.
4.2 Learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant−bank has also heavily relied upon the
decision of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the case of M/s Cambridge Solutions
Limited, Bangalore v. Global Software Limited, Chennai, 2016−5− L.W. 45. It is submitted that in
the said case also the plaintiff filed a suit alleging fraud while challenging the order passed by the
Recovery Officer and despite the allegation of fraud the suit challenging the order passed by the
Recovery Officer is held to be not maintainable. It is submitted that in the aforesaid decision, the
Division Bench of the High Court has found the allegation of fraud to be illusory. It is submitted that
special leave petition against the said decision has been dismissed by this Court. 4.3 It is further
submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant−bank that in the present
case also the allegation of fraud is not with respect to the Guarantee Deed executed by the Guarantor
– Shri M.C. Kallikutty, but with respect to Partnership Deed. It is submitted that therefore the suits
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
4

filed by the original plaintiffs are frivolous and abuse of a process of law and therefore the plaints
are liable to be rejected on that ground also and in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of
the CPC. In support of his above submission, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant
– bank has heavily relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of T. Arivandandam v. T.V.
Satyapal (1977) 4 SCC 467; A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. A.P. Agencies (1989) 2 SCC 163; Sopan
Sukhdeo Sable v. Assistant Charity Commissioner (2004) 3 SCC 137 and Madanuri Sri Rama
Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal (2017) 13 SCC 174.
4.4 Making the above submissions and relying upon the above decisions, it is prayed to allow the
present appeals.
5. The present appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri Robin R. David, learned Advocate appearing
on behalf of the original plaintiffs. It is vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of
the case, more particularly when there are specific allegations of fraud in the respective suits which
can be decided only by the civil court, both, the learned trial Court as well as the High Court have
rightly refused to reject the plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC. 5.1 It
is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original plaintiffs that as
such they are the bona fide purchasers of the suit properties which were alleged to have been
mortgaged by their vendor – Shri M.C. Kallikutty. It is submitted that in the criminal proceedings
initiated by the said Shri Kallikutty, there are specific allegations of fraud and in fact charge−sheets
have been filed in the criminal proceedings initiated by the said Shri M.C. Kallikutty. It is submitted
that in fact thereafter in the criminal proceedings the trial Court has convicted the partners of the
partnership firm – G Suresh Babu and Ravi Chandran for the offences under Sections 120B read
with 465, 466, 468, 471, 419 and 420 of the IPC. It is submitted that the learned Magistrate has
specifically observed and held that accused entered into a criminal conspiracy and created a forged
Partition Deed of Shri M.C. Kallikutty by forging the signatures and thumb impressions of witnesses
and obtained the loan from the bank. It is submitted that the learned trial Court as well as the High
Court have rightly refused to reject the respective plaints under Order 7 Rule 11 (d) of the CPC. 5.2
Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeals.
6. In reply, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant−bank has submitted that so far as
the criminal proceedings are concerned, the bank is not a party to the said criminal proceedings and
therefore any observations/finding of the Magistrate shall not bind the bank.
6.1 It is further submitted by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant – bank that
even the criminal proceedings were with respect to the partnership deed and not with respect to the
guarantee deed executed by Shri M.C. Kallikutty – Guarantor. It is submitted that even the
guarantee deed executed by Shri M.C. Kallikutty – Guarantor was not even before the learned
Magistrate. It is submitted that therefore the plaintiffs cannot rely upon the said criminal
proceedings and/or cannot take the shelter under the word “fraud” used in the plaints. It is
submitted that therefore the allegations of fraud in the plaints are illusory and the suits are
vexatious and have been filed with mala fide intention and therefore this is a fit case to exercise
powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC.
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
5

7. We have heard the learned Advocates appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.
7.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that there is already an order passed by the DRT against
the principal borrower and the Guarantor and the recovery certificate issued by the Recovery
Officer. That the appellant−bank sanctioned the term loan in favour of the principal borrower –
partnership firm and its partners. The partners of the partnership firm – principal borrower
executed a Memorandum of Agreement for Agricultural Loans, thereby agreeing to abide by the
terms and conditions depicted therein. The Guarantor – Shri M.C. Kallikutty, who was defendant
no.4 in the application before the DRT, also signed the said agreement as co−obligant, making
himself jointly and severally liable to pay the loan amount due to the bank in respect of the said term
loan. The term loan was further secured by the partners of the partnership firm – principal borrower
by mortgaging the lands of the firm and also by the Guarantor – Shri M.C. Kallikutty by mortgaging
the lands owned by him. That the judgment and decree came to be passed by the DRT as far back as
on 27.08.2003 and even the recovery certificate was issued in favour of the bank on 16.09.2003.
That after a period of 5 years the said Shri Kallikutty filed an interlocutory application before the
DRT to set aside the ex−parte decree dated 27.08.2003, which came to be dismissed by the DRT on
12.06.2009. However, in the meantime, the said Kallikutty initiated the criminal proceedings
against the partners of the partnership firm – principal borrower alleging forgery with respect to the
partnership deed. That thereafter after a period of 15 years from the date of mortgage and after
seven years from the date of decree passed by the DRT, the original plaintiffs filed the present suits
basically challenging the decree passed by the DRT dated 27.08.2003 alleging fraud. That in the said
suits, it is the case on behalf of the original plaintiffs that they have purchased the suit property,
which have been mortgaged while taking the term loan, from their vendor vide sale deeds dated
30.01.1996 and 10.03.1997 respectively and as the suit lands purchased by them vide sale deeds
dated 30.01.1996 and 10.03.1997 respectively were put to mortgage by fraud by the principal
borrower – partners of the partnership firm and therefore the decree passed by the DRT shall not
bind them. In the suits, the original plaintiffs have prayed inter alia for the following reliefs:
“a) declaring that the alleged order dated 27.8.03 passed by the Debt Recovery
Tribunal, Coimbatore in T.A. No. 822/2002 is non−est, ultra vires, null and void, and
not binding on the suit property and for a consequential permanent injunction
restraining the 6th defendant from interfering with the plaintiff peaceful possession
and enjoyment of the suit property by taking any action as against the suit property
by way of attachment or sale or otherwise;
b) declaring the alleged mortgage said to have been created by the first defendant was
the 5th defendant in respect of the suit property is non est, null and void and binding
on the same and for a consequent permanent injunction restraining the 5 th
defendant from interfering with the plaintiff’s possession and enjoyment of the suit
property by taking any action as against the suit property by way of sale or
otherwise.” Thus, basically the plaintiffs are challenging the decree passed by the
DRT being purchasers. At this stage, it is required to be noted that in fact the suit
property was mortgaged in the month of September, 1995 and the original plaintiffs
have claimed that they have purchased the suit property on 30.01.1996 and
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
6

10.03.1997 respectively. It is also required to be noted at this stage that at no point of
time and even when the Guarantor – Shri Kallikutty filed an interlocutory application
before the learned DRT in the year 2008 for quashing and setting aside the ex−parte
decree passed by the DRT, he did not disclose that he had already sold the suit
properties to the plaintiffs. It is also required to be noted at this stage that even the
sale deeds dated 30.01.1996 and 10.03.1997 respectively, as per the averments in the
sale deeds, were executed by Shri Kallikutty as power of attorney holder of the
original owners and even the sale consideration was paid in cash. As observed
hereinabove and as mentioned in the judgment and decree passed by the learned
DRT dated 27.08.2003, not only Kallikutty – Guarantor signed the Memorandum of
Agreement of Agricultural Loans dated 28.09.1995 by which the partners of the firm
agreed to make themselves jointly and severally liable to pay the loan and became
co−obligant, even the said Kallikutty also mortgaged the lands owned by him. On
considering the averments in the plaints there are allegations of fraud with respect to
partnership deed and that too by the partners of the partnership firm – principal
borrower.
However, there is no reference at all in the plaints with respect to properties mortgaged by Shri
Kallikutty even after the period of 15 years from the date of the mortgage and after 7 years from the
date of decree passed by the DRT, basically challenging the decree passed by the DRT. As the suits
were filed challenging the decree passed by the DRT, the appellant−bank – one of the defendants
filed applications to reject the plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC on
the ground that considering the provisions of RDDBFI Act, more particularly Sections 18, 19 and 20
of the Act, the suits are not maintainable. Both the applications are dismissed by the learned trial
Court and which are further confirmed by the High Court. Therefore, the short question which is
posed for consideration of this Court is, whether the suits filed by the plaintiffs were liable to be
rejected in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC or not?
7.2 While considering the aforesaid issue/question, few decisions of this Court on exercise of powers
under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC are required to be referred to and considered. 7.3 In the case of
T. Arivandandam (supra), while considering the very same provision i.e. Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC
and the decree of the trial Court in considering such application, this Court in para 5 has observed
and held as under:
“5. We have not the slightest hesitation in condemning the petitioner for the gross
abuse of the process of the court repeatedly and unrepentantly resorted to. From the
statement of the facts found in the judgment of the High Court, it is perfectly plain
that the suit now pending before the First Munsif’s Court, Bangalore, is a flagrant
misuse of the mercies of the law in receiving plaints. The learned Munsif must
remember that if on a meaningful – not formal – reading of the plaint it is manifestly
vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, he should
exercise his power under Order 7, Rule 11 CPC taking care to see that the ground
mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever drafting has created the illusion of a
cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing by examining the party
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
7

searchingly under Order 10, CPC. An activist Judge is the answer to irresponsible law
suits….” 7.4 In the case of Church of Christ Charitable Trust and Educational
Charitable Society v. Ponniamman Educational Trust (2012) 8 SCC 706, this Court in
paras 13 has observed and held as under:
“13. While scrutinizing the plaint averments, it is the bounden duty of the trial Court
to ascertain the materials for cause of action. The cause of action is a bundle of facts
which taken with the law applicable to them gives the plaintiff the right to relief
against the defendant. Every fact which is necessary for the plaintiff to prove to
enable him to get a decree should be set out in clear terms. It is worthwhile to find
out the meaning of the words “cause of action”. A cause of action must include some
act done by the Defendant since in the absence of such an act no cause of action can
possible accrue.” 7.5 In A.B.C. Laminart Pvt. Ltd. v. A.P. Agencies, Salem (supra), this
Court explained the meaning of “cause of action” as follows:
“12.A cause of action means every fact, which if traversed, it would be necessary for
the plaintiff to prove in order to support his right to a judgment of the court. In other
words, it is a bundle of facts which taken with the law applicable to them gives the
plaintiff a right to relief against the defendant. It must include some act done by the
defendant since in the absence of such an act no cause of action can possibly accrue.
It is not limited to the actual infringement of the right sued on but includes all the
material facts on which it is founded. It does not comprise evidence necessary to
prove such facts, but every fact necessary for the plaintiff to prove to enable him to
obtain a decree. Everything which is not proved would give the defendant a right to
immediate judgment must be part of the cause of action. But it has no relation
whatever to the defence which may be set up by the defendant nor does it depend
upon the character of the relief prayed for by the plaintiff.” 7.6 In the case of Sopan
Sukhdeo Sable (supra) in paras 11 and 12, this Court has observed as under:
“11. In I.T.C. Ltd. v. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal [(1998) 2 SCC 70] it was held
that the basic question to be decided while dealing with an application filed under
Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code is whether a real cause of action has been set out in the
plaint or something purely illusory has been stated with a view to get out of Order 7
Rule 11 of the Code.
12. The trial Court must remember that if on a meaningful and not formal reading of
the plaint it is manifestly vexatious and meritless in the sense of not disclosing a clear
right to sue, it should exercise the power under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code taking
care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. If clever drafting has
created the illusion of a cause of action, it has to be nipped in the bud at the first
hearing by examining the party searchingly under Order 10 of the Code. (See T.
Arivandandam (supra).” 7.7 In the case of Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy
(supra), this Court has observed and held as under:
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
8

“7. The plaint can be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 if conditions enumerated in the
said provision are fulfilled. It is needless to observe that the power under Order 7
Rule 11 CPC can be exercised by the Court at any stage of the suit. The relevant facts
which need to be looked into for deciding the application are the averments of the
plaint only. If on an entire and meaningful reading of the plaint, it is found that the
suit is manifestly vexatious and meritless in the sense of not disclosing any right to
sue, the court should exercise power under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. Since the power
conferred on the court to terminate civil action at the threshold is drastic, the
conditions enumerated under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC to the exercise of power of
rejection of plaint have to be strictly adhered to. The averments of the plaint have to
be read as a whole to find out whether the suit is barred by any law. It is needless to
observe that the question as to whether the suit is barred by any law, would always
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. The averments in the written
statement as well as the contentions of the defendant are wholly immaterial while
considering the prayer of the defendant for rejection of the plaint. Even when the
allegations made in the plaint are taken to be correct as a whole on their face value, if
they show that the suit is barred by any law, or do not disclose cause of action, the
application for rejection of plaint can be entertained and the power under Order 7
Rule 11 CPC can be exercised. If clever drafting of the plaint has created the illusion of
a cause of action, the court will nip it in the bud at the earliest so that bogus litigation
will end at the earlier stage.” 7.8 In the case of Ram Singh v. Gram Panchayat Mehal
Kalan (1986) 4 SCC 364, this Court has observed and held that when the suit is
barred by any law, the plaintiff cannot be allowed to circumvent that provision by
means of clever drafting so as to avoid mention of those circumstances, by which the
suit is barred by law of limitation.
8. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions on exercise of
powers under Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC to the facts of the case on hand and the
averments in the plaints, we are of the opinion that both the courts below have
materially erred in not rejecting the plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule
11 of the CPC. As observed hereinabove, the main prayer in the suits is challenging
the decree passed by the DRT.
The decree passed by the learned DRT and even the order passed by the Recovery Officer are
appealable under Section 20 of the RDDBFI Act. In the case of O.C. Krishnan and others (supra),
this Court has observed and held that in view of the alternate remedy of preferring the appeal before
the DRAT, the petition under Article 227 challenging the order passed by the DRT shall not be
maintainable, without exhaustion of such remedy. In the case of O.C. Krishnan and others (supra),
decree passed by the DRT was challenged in a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
The High Court allowed the petition. While allowing the appeal of the bank – Punjab National Bank,
this Court has observed that without exhaustion of the remedies under the RDDBFI Act, the High
Court ought not to have exercised its jurisdiction under Article 227. While holding so, in paragraph
6, this Court has observed and held as under:
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
9

“6. The Act has been enacted with a view to provide a special procedure for recovery
of debts due to the banks and the financial institutions. There is a hierarchy of appeal
provided in the Act, namely, filing of an appeal under Section 20 and this fast−track
procedure cannot be allowed to be derailed either by taking recourse to proceedings
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution or by filing a civil suit, which is
expressly barred. Even though a provision under an Act cannot expressly oust the
jurisdiction of the court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, nevertheless,
when there is an alternative remedy available, judicial prudence demands that the
Court refrains from exercising its jurisdiction under the said constitutional
provisions. This was a case where the High Court should not have entertained the
petition under Article 227 of the Constitution and should have directed the
respondent to take recourse to the appeal mechanism provided by the Act.”
9. Relying upon and following the decision of this Court in the case of O.C. Krishnan
and others (supra), thereafter the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the
case of M/s Cambridge Solutions Limited (supra), has rejected the plaint in which the
order passed by the DRT was challenged, in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11
(d) of the CPC. It is required to be noted that in the said case also there were
allegations of fraud in the plaint and considering the averments in the plaint, it was
found that the allegations of fraud are illusory. It is observed by the Division Bench in
the said decision that specific instances and acts of fraud with evidence have to be
pleaded in the plaint. It is further observed that mere statements are not enough. It is
further observed that it is not sufficient if just fraud is pleaded and there must be
material to show that the fraud is committed.
10. Having considered the pleadings and the averments in the suits, more particularly
the allegations of fraud, we find that the allegations of fraud are with respect to the
partnership deed and there are no allegations at all with respect to mortgage created
by the Guarantor – Shri Kallikutty and that too with respect to the deed of guarantee
executed by the Guarantor. Much reliance is placed upon the judgment and order
passed by the learned Magistrate holding the partners of the firm guilty.
However, it is required to be noted that even in the said judgment passed by the learned Magistrate
there is no reference to the deed of guarantee and/or the mortgage created by the Guarantor. Even
the bank is not a party to the said proceedings. It is reported that against the judgment and order
passed by the learned Magistrate, further appeal is pending. Be that as it may, considering the
pleadings/averments in the suits and the allegations of fraud, we are of the opinion that the
allegations of fraud are illusory and only with a view to get out of the judgment and decree passed by
the DRT. We are of the opinion that therefore the suits are vexatious and are filed with a mala fide
intention to get out of the judgment and decree passed by the DRT. As observed hereinabove, the
plaintiffs are claiming right, title on the basis of the sale deeds dated 30.01.1996 and 10.03.1997
respectively executed by Shri Kallikutty as power of attorney holder of the original owner. However,
according to the averments in the plaints, they have purchased the suit property from their vendor
which is factually incorrect. On a bare reading of the sale deeds, it appears that the sale deeds are
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
10

executed by Shri Kallikutty as power of attorney holder of the original vendor. As observed
hereinabove, even in the year 2008, when the said Kallikutty filed interlocutory application before
the DRT to quash and set aside the ex−parte judgment and decree passed by the DRT, he did not
disclose that he has already sold the property in favour of the original plaintiffs. As observed
hereinabove, even the sale consideration is alleged to have been paid in cash. Before the execution of
the sale deeds dated 30.01.1996 and 10.03.1997, the lands were already put as a security by way of
mortgage with the appellant−bank by Shri Kallikutty. Thus, considering the overall facts and
circumstances of the case, the suits filed by the original plaintiffs are vexatious, frivolous and
nothing but an abuse of process of law and court. Therefore, considering the law laid down by this
Court in the aforesaid decisions, more particularly in the case of T. Arivandandam (supra), the suits
being vexatious and frivolous, the plaints are required to be rejected in exercise of powers under
Order 7 Rule 11 of the CPC. As pointed out by Krishna Iyer, J. in T. Arivandandam (supra), the ritual
of repeating a word or creation of an illusion in the plaint can certainly be unravelled and exposed
by the court while dealing with an application under Order 7 Rule 11(a). As observed by this Court,
such proceedings are required to be nipped in the bud. Even otherwise as observed hereinabove,
without exhausting the remedy of appeal provided under the RDDBFI Act, the suits with the basic
relief of challenging the decree passed by the DRT were liable to be dismissed, as observed and held
by this Court in the case of O.C. Krishnan and others (supra).
11. At this stage, it is also required to be noted that the suits have been filed after a period of 15 years
from the date of mortgage and after a period of 7 years from the date of passing of the decree by the
DRT. In the plaints, it is averred that the plaintiffs came to know about the mortgage and the
judgment and decree passed by the DRT only six months back. However, the said averments can be
said to be too vague. Nothing has been averred when and how the plaintiffs came to know about the
judgment and decree passed by the DRT and the mortgage of the property. Only with a view to get
out of the law of limitation and only with a view to bring the suits within the period of limitation,
such vague averments are made. On such vague averments, plaintiffs cannot get out of the law of
limitation. There must be specific pleadings and averments in the plaints on limitation. Thus, on
this ground also, the plaints were liable to be rejected. As observed hereinabove, the plaints are
vexatious, frivolous, meritless and nothing but an abuse of process of law and court. Therefore, this
is a fit case to exercise the powers under Order 7 Rule 11 (d) of the CPC. Both the courts below have
materially erred in not rejecting the plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the
CPC. Both the courts below have materially erred in not exercising the jurisdiction vested in them.
12. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, both these appeals succeed. The impugned
common judgment and order passed by the High Court in dismissing the revision applications and
the orders passed by the learned trial Court rejecting the applications preferred by the appellant−
bank to reject the respective plaints in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC are
hereby quashed and set aside. Consequently, the plaints filed by the original plaintiffs being O.S. No.
1269/2010 and O.S. No. 233/2011 pending in the Court of Additional Subordinate Court,
Coimbatore are rejected. The instant appeals are allowed accordingly. No costs.
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
11

                                    ………………………………..J.
                                    [UDAY UMESH LALIT]
                                    ……………………………….J.
                                    [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI;                          ………………………………..J.
FEBRUARY 28, 2020.                  [M.R. SHAH]
Canara Bank vs P Sellathal (Dead) Thr Lrs on 28 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22052834/
12
