Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1150, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
196, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1150 (2020) 4 SCALE 191, (2020) 4 SCALE
191
Author: Indira Banerjee
Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Indira Banerjee
                                                                                        
                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 238 OF 2011
                         CHHOTA AHIRWAR                                     …..Appellant
                                                           versus
                         THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                      ….Respondent
                                                  JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
This appeal is against a judgment and order dated 5 th November, 2008 passed by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur, dismissing Criminal Appeal No.1050 of 1994 filed by the appellant,
and upholding the judgment dated 26th August, 1994 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge,
District Panna, Madhya Pradesh in Sessions Case No. 13/1993, inter alia, convicting the accused
appellant of offence under Section 307 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
1

2. The accused appellant was tried by the Sessions Court, on charges under Section 307/34 of the
Indian Penal Code, for attempt, with common intent along with the main accused Khilai, to murder
the complainant and for instigating the said accused Khilai to fire at the complainant with a country
made pistol, in furtherance of a common intent to kill the complainant.
3. In a nutshell, the case of the Prosecution is that, on 22 nd October, 1992 at about 11.00 a.m., there
was a quarrel between the accused appellant and the complainant, in which the said accused Khilai
intervened. The said accused Khilai who had joined the accused appellant and the complainant, took
out a country made pistol from the pocket of his trousers, pointed it towards the complainant and
fired at the instigation of the accused appellant, who urged the said accused Khilai to kill the
complainant. The complainant, therefore, sustained injuries on his forehead near his eye and on his
lips and shoulder with splinters from the pistol and started bleeding. It is the further case of the
Prosecution, that after the firing, the accused Khilai fled the scene of occurrence and the accused
appellant followed him. Immediately thereafter, the complainant reported the incident at the
Mohandra Chowki. The report was forwarded to the Simariya Police station where Crime
No.110/1992 was registered.
4. After investigation, Chargesheet was filed against the accused appellant and the main accused
Khilai, both of whom pleaded ‘Not Guilty” and claimed to be tried. To establish the charges framed
against the accused, the Prosecution examined 11 witnesses. The accused appellant did not examine
any witness nor did the main accused, Khilai.
5. By a judgment dated 26th August, 1994, the Additional Sessions Judge, Panna held the accused
appellant guilty of offence under Section 307/34 of the Indian Penal Code and the main accused
Khilai guilty of offence under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code. By an order of sentence passed
on the same day the accused appellant was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five
years in addition to fine of Rs.1000/-.
6. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the accused
appellant appealed to the High Court. The said appeal being Criminal Appeal No. 1050 of 1994 has
been dismissed by the judgment and order impugned in this appeal.
7. The accused appellant, the main accused, Khilai, and the complainant were all related. Sunder
Lal, father of the main accused Khilai and uncle of the complainant, had given his share of land to
the accused appellant for cultivation. There were land disputes between members of the family and
in particular between the complainant and the accused appellant.
8. Of the eleven witnesses examined by the Prosecution, the first Prosecution Witnesses (PW-1) only
gave evidence of preparation of a sketch map at the place of occurrence and the second Prosecution
Witness (PW-2) testified to the receipt of case records in the office of the District Magistrate. The
Sixth Prosecution Witness (PW-6) only witnessed the preparation of the site map of the place of
occurrence, recovery of an iron splinter and some blood stained clothes and articles. Three
witnesses, that is, the 5 th, 9th and 10th witnesses (PW-5, PW-9, PW-10) did not support the case
made out by the Prosecution and were declared hostile. The ninth and tenth Prosecution Witnesses
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
2

who were produced to testify to the confession allegedly made by the main accused Khilai in their
presence, leading to recovery of the weapon, categorically denied their presence at the time of
recovery of the pistol and were declared hostile. They also denied that the main accused Khilai had
made any confession. The 11 th Prosecution Witness (PW-11) only testified to the arrest of the
accused appellant. The evidence of these witnesses is of no relevance to the guilt of the accused
appellant.
9. The 8th Prosecution Witness (PW-8) who had been working as Assistant Surgeon at the Primary
Health Centre, Mohandra described the wounds found on the body of the complainant and opined
that the injuries were caused by splinters from a firearm. In cross examination he said that no
splinters were found from the injury during examination. The evidence of this witness suggests that
the injuries could have been caused by firing a pistol. He ruled out the possibility of the injury
having been caused as a consequence of explosion of stone. At the highest, the evidence of PW-8
establishes that a pistol was fired, as a result of which the complainant sustained injuries. The
possibility of the injuries being sustained while cleaning the pistol was not ruled out by this witness.
This witness has also not said anything relevant to the guilt of the accused appellant.
10. The 7th Prosecution Witness (PW-7) was the Investigating Officer, who deposed that he had sent
the report of the incident to the Simaria Police Station on the basis of which criminal case
No.110/1992 under Section 307/34 of the Indian Penal Code had been registered and had examined
the complainant, Prem Shankar Kateha (PW-4), Sabbu Chourasia and Bharat and had seized blood
stained clothes, articles etc. from the place of occurrence.
11. There is nothing in the evidence of PW-1, PW-2, PW-5, PW-6, PW-7, PW-8, PW-9, PW-10 and
PW-11 to establish the guilt of the accused appellant. The complainant, a cousin of the main accused
Khilai, and an injured witness deposed as the 3 rd Prosecution Witness (PW-3). PW-3 stated that on
22 nd October, 1992, at about 11.00 O’Clock, when he was going to Khareja from his house, the
accused appellant stopped him on the way and told him not to cultivate his land. The main accused
Khilai also came and intervened, whereupon the complainant told the main accused Khilai, not to
interfere and to go home, as he was in no way concerned with the dispute between the complainant
(PW-3) and the accused appellant.
12. The complainant (PW-3) deposed that on being told to go home, the main accused Khilai took
out a pistol from the right pocket of his pants and pointed it at him. The complainant (PW-3) told
the main accused Khilai not to open fire, whereupon the accused appellant urged the main accused
Khilai to kill the complainant (PW-3). Thereafter, the main accused, Khilai fired the pistol, causing
injury to the complainant with the splinters. The complainant (PW-3) further stated that the
incident took place in the presence of Prem Shankar Kateha who desposed as the fourth witness for
the Prosecution (PW-4) who was there at the place of occurrence and also in the presence of Sabbu
Chourasia who had been selling oil and Bharat Kateha who had been helping in arranging the cans
of oil.
13. According to the complainant (PW-3), the aforesaid three persons, Prem Shankar Kateha
(PW-4), Sabbu Chourasia and Bharat Kateha challenged the main accused Khilai, whereupon Khilai
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
3

fled towards the bus stand and the accused appellant followed him running.
14. From the evidence of the complainant (PW-3), it transpires that when heated arguments were
going on and the complainant (PW-3) urged the main accused not to interfere as he was in no way
concerned, the main accused Khilai took out a pistol from the pocket of his trousers and pointed it
towards the complainant (PW-
3). When the complainant (PW-3) told the main accused Khilai not to fire, the accused appellant
exhorted the accused Khilai to kill the complainant. The complainant (PW-3) said that the main
accused Khilai, thereafter, fired at him.
15. The evidence of the complainant (PW-3) indicates the existence of serious disputes between the
appellant and the accused, and/or the immediate members of their respective families. In his
cross-examination the complainant (PW-3) admitted that one year before the incident his uncle
Sunder Lal, that is, father of the main accused Khilai, had filed an application against the
complainant (PW-3) and his father Asha Ram at Tehsil office, Pawai regarding the land in dispute.
The complainant (PW-3) deposed that at the time of the incident his uncle Sunder Lal had given his
share to the accused appellant on ‘Batai’ for cultivation. He stated that the share of his uncle Sunder
Lal, which was given to the accused appellant on ‘Batai’, was adjacent to his share of land. The
complainant (PW-3) also admitted in cross-examination that on the basis of a report filed by the
main accused, Khilai, and his father Sunder Lal, a case has been registered under the complainant
(PW-3) and his younger brother Buttu in the court of Judicial Magistrate, Pawai under Sections 379
and 447 of the Indian Penal Code. The case was filed before the incident. The complainant (PW-3)
also admitted that there were several other cases between the complainant (PW-3) and/or members
of his immediate and the accused appellant as also members of the accused appellant’s family which
were still pending at the time of the incident.
16. It is not in dispute that the accused appellant neither carried arms nor opened fire. The accused
appellant is alleged to have instigated the opening of fire. In cross-examination the complainant
(PW-3) admitted that he had not in his statement to the police under Section 161 of the Cr.PC stated
anything about any instigation by the accused appellant to the main accused Khilai.
17. The Sessions Court has apparently proceeded on the basis that PW-4, eye witness to the incident
had corroborated the evidence of the complainant (PW-3). The Sessions Court however overlooked
certain serious discrepancies between the evidence of PW-4 and the evidence of the complainant
(PW-3) with regard to the alleged role of the accused appellant. While the complainant (PW-3),
himself the injured witness, has deposed that the accused appellant exhorted the main accused
Khilai to kill him, after the main accused Khilai had pointed the pistol at the complainant (PW-
3), PW-4 had deposed that on being told by the accused appellant to beat the complainant (PW-3),
the main accused Khilai took out the pistol from the right pocket of his pant and fired.
18. From the evidence of PW-4 it also transpires that the accused- appellant and the complainant
(PW-3) were quarrelling over a land related dispute. The accused appellant asked the complainant
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
4

(PW-
3) not to go to the field, whereupon the complainant retorted that the land belonged to his
grandparents, and that no one could stop him from going there. The heated quarrel, with raised
voices, attracted attention and about 50/60 villagers gathered at the place of occurrence. The main
accused, Khilai, who was cycling by the place of occurrence, stopped and asked the complainant,
PW-3 why he was going to the field whereupon the accused appellant told the main accused Khilai
that the complainant would not easily give up and urged the main accused to beat him. At this point,
the main accused Khilai took out the pistol from his pocket.
19. PW-5, who was declared hostile has confirmed that there was an altercation between the
complainant and the accused appellant. According to this appellant, the main accused Khilai came
and intervened. The main accused Khilai hurled abuses at the complainant, took out his pistol from
his pocket and threatened to kill the complainant if he went to the field. Thereafter the main accused
went to the back of the house, after which the sound of firing was heard. PW-5 did not say that the
accused appellant instigated the main accused Khilai to shoot.
20. It is not in dispute that the accused appellant did not open fire. The Prosecution has alleged that
it was the main accused Khilai who had fired from his pistol and injured the complainant. The
question is whether, having regard to the facts established by the Prosecution, the appellant could
have been held guilty of offence under Section 307 by invocation of Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code.
21. It is a settled principle of criminal law that only the person who actually commits the offence can
be held guilty and sentenced in accordance with law. However, Section 34 lays down a principle of
joint liability in a criminal act, the essence of which is to be found in the existence of common
intention, instigating the main accused to do the criminal act, in furtherance of such intention. Even
when separate acts are done by two or more persons in furtherance of a common intention, each
person is liable for the result of all the acts as if all the acts had been done by all of these persons.
22. Section 34 is only a rule of evidence which attracts the principle of joint criminal liability and
does not create any distinct, substantive offence as held by this Court in B.N. Srikantiah vs. Siddiah
reported in AIR 1958 SC 672; Bharwad Mepa Dana and Anr. Vs. State of Bombay reported in AIR
1960 SC 289 and other similar cases. To quote Arijit Pasayat, J. in Harbans Kaur and Another vs.
State of Haryana reported in (2005) 9 SCC 195; the distinctive feature of Section 34 is the element of
participation in action.
23. Common intention can only be inferred from proved facts and circumstances as held by this
Court in Manik Das & Ors. vs. State of Assam reported in AIR 2007 SC 2274. Of course, as held in
Abdul Mannan vs. State of Assam reported in (2010) 3 SCC 381, the common intention can develop
during the course of an occurrence.
24. Section 34 is only attracted when a specific criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance
of the common intention of all, in which case all the offenders are liable for that criminal act in the
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
5

same manner as the principal offender as if the act were done by all the offenders. This Section does
not whittle down the liability of the principal offender committing the principal act but additionally
makes all other offenders liable. The essence of liability under Section 34 is simultaneous consensus
of the minds of persons participating in the criminal act to bring about a particular result, which
consensus can even be developed at the spot as held in Lallan Rai & Ors. vs. State of Bihar reported
in (2003) 1 SCC
268. There must be a common intention to commit the particular offence. To constitute common
intention, it is absolutely necessary that the intention of each one of the accused should be known to
the rest of the accused.
25. Mere participation in crime with others is not sufficient to attribute common intention. The
question is whether, having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, it can be held that the
Prosecution established that there was a common intention between the accused appellant and the
main accused Khilai to kill the complainant. In other words, the Prosecution is required to prove a
premeditated intention of both the accused appellant and the main accused Khilai, to kill the
complainant, of which both the accused appellant and the main accused Khilai were aware. Section
34 of the Indian Penal Code, is really intended to meet a case in which it is difficult to distinguish
between the acts of individual members of a party and prove exactly what part was played by each of
them.
26. To attract Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, no overt act is needed on the part of the accused
if they share common intention with others in respect of the ultimate criminal act, which may be
done by any one of the accused sharing such intention [see Ashok Basho (2010) SCC 660 (669)]. To
quote from the judgment of the Privy Council in the famous case of Barendra Kumar Ghosh
reported in AIR 1925 Privy Council 1, “they also serve who stand and wait”.
27. Common intention implies acting in concert. Existence of a prearranged plan has to be proved
either from the conduct of the accused, or from circumstances or from any incriminating facts. It is
not enough to have the same intention independently of each other.
28. The question in this case is, whether the Prosecution has been able to establish a pre-arranged
common intention between the accused appellant and the main accused Khilai to kill the
complainant in pursuance of which the accused Khilai open fired from his pistol. The answer to the
aforesaid question has to be in the negative for the following reasons:
(i) A quarrel broke out between the accused appellant and the complainant. When the
accused appellant tried to prevent the complainant from going to the field, the
complainant insisted on doing so. While the quarrel was going on, the main accused
Khilai arrived at the spot and intervened whereupon the complainant told him off,
saying he should go home as he was in no way concerned with the dispute. At this,
the main accused Khilai brought out a pistol from his right pant pocket and aimed it
at the complainant.
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
6

(ii) There is no evidence to establish any pre-arrangement to converge at the place of
occurrence. The circumstances established suggest that intervention by the main
accused Khilai was by chance. The main accused Khilai chanced to stop as he was
passing by the place of occurrence when the accused appellant and the complainant
were quarrelling.
(iii) As per the evidence of the complainant, who is a injured witness, when the
complainant told the main accused Khilai not to intervene and to go home, Khilai
reacted by taking out the pistol from his right pant pocket and pointing it at the
complainant. The pistol was taken out by the main accused and pointed at Khilai,
without any instigation from the accused appellant.
(iv) Even if it is accepted that the accused appellant uttered the words attributed to
him by the complainant (PW-3) in his evidence, this seems to have been done on the
spur of the moment. Pre-
arrangement is not established.
(v) As observed above, there are some notable discrepancies between the evidence of the
complainant (PW-3) and PW-4 which raise serious doubts with regard to the truth and/or accuracy
of their evidence particularly in view of the enmity and pre-existing family disputes between the
parties.
(vi) Even though PW-5 may have been declared hostile, his evidence is not to be rejected with in its
entirely. This witness also confirmed that there was an altercation between the accused appellant
and the complainant, in which the main accused Khilai intervened, took out his pistol and aimed it
at the complainant. These facts are corroborated by PW-3 (the Complainant) and PW-4. This
witness however stated that the main accused Khilai took out his pistol and threatened to kill the
complainant. He did not say that the accused appellant urged the main accused, Khilai to shoot.
29. Even though there may be some evidence that the main accused took out a pistol and opened
fire, the Prosecution has miserably failed to establish any common, premeditated or prearranged
intention jointly of the accused appellant and the main accused Khilai to kill the complainant, on the
spot or otherwise. The Prosecution has also failed to prove that the pistol was fired at the
exhortation of the accused appellant. In our considered view, the Sessions Court and the High Court
both fell in error in convicting the accused appellant.
30. For the reasons discussed above, the appeal is allowed. The judgment and order of the High
Court under appeal, confirming the judgment and order of the conviction of the Sessions Court as
also the judgment and order of the Sessions Court are set aside, as against the accused appellant.
The accused appellant is acquitted and directed to be set free forthwith. It is made clear that this
Court has not considered the merits of the conviction of the main accused Khilai and the appeal, if
any, filed by the main accused Khilai shall be decided on its own merits.
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
7

...................................J (INDIRA BANERJEE) ...................................J (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
FEBRUARY 06, 2020 NEW DELHI
Chhota Ahirwar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 6 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62704506/
8
