Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4721, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
505
Author: Arun Mishra
Bench: M.R. Shah, Vineet Saran, Arun Mishra
                                               1
                                                                REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL ORIGINAL/ APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO.98 OF 2012
         CHRISTIAN MEDICAL COLLEGE
         VELLORE ASSOCIATION                               … PETITIONER(S)
                                            VERSUS
         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                         … RESPONDENT(S)
                                          WITH
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 102 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 104 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 105 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 107 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 108 OF 2012
                            TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 99 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 119 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 120 OF 2012
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 125−127 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 110 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 111 OF 2012
                           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 112 OF 2012
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 113−114 OF 2012
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 115−116 OF 2012
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 117−118 OF 2012
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2020.04.29
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
1

14:01:59 IST
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 123−124 OF 2012
Reason:
                         TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 128−130 OF 2012
                      2
  TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 131 OF 2012
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 132−134 OF 2012
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 138−139 OF 2012
  TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 144 OF 2012
  TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 145 OF 2012
  TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 142 OF 2012
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 23−24 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 5 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 7 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 1 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 2 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 3 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 4 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 11 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 37−38 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 59 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 8 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 9 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 10 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 12−13 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 16 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 17 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 18 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 14−15 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 19 OF 2013
   TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 20 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 21−22 OF 2013
                     3
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 25 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 28−29 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 30 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 48 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 49 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 31−32 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 33−36 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 39 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 40 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 42 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 41 OF 2013
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
2

 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 43 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 44 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 46 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 45 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 47 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 60 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 61 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 62 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 63−65 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 66−69 OF 2013
TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NOS. 70−71 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 72 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 73 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 75 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 76 OF 2013
 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 108 OF 2013
                                   4
             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 443 OF 2016
             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 750 OF 2016
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2383 OF 2020
     (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 28223 OF 2016)
                                 AND
           TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 25 OF 2019
                          JUDGMENT
ARUN MISHRA, J.
1. Most of the cases have a chequered history. Initially, petitioners have questioned four
notifications − two notifications dated 21.12.2010 issued by Medical Council of India (for short, ‘the
MCI’) and other two notifications dated 31.5.2012, issued by Dental Council of India (for short, ‘the
DCI’). The MCI by virtue of Regulations on Graduate Medical Education (Amendment) 2010, (Part
II) notified by the Government of India, amended the Regulations on Graduate Medical Education,
1997. Similarly, the other notification issued by MCI called “Post−Graduate Medical Education
(Amendment) Regulation, 2010 (Part−II)” to amend the Post Graduate Medical Education
Regulations, 2000. The regulations came into force on their publication in the Official Gazette. The
other two notifications dated 31.5.2012 issued by DCI were relating to admission in the BDS and
MDS courses.
2. The MCI issued notifications in exercise of power conferred by Section 33 of the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 (for short, ‘the Act of 1956’). The amendments were made in the Regulation on
Graduate Medical Education, 1997. The change was made in Clause 5 in Chapter II of the
Regulations. Clause 5 provided for procedure for selection thus:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
3

"6. In Chapter II, Clause 5 under the heading “Procedure for selection to MBBS
Course shall be as follows” shall be substituted as under:
(i) There shall be a single eligibility−cum−entrance examination, namely, ‘National
Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for admission to MBBS course’ in each academic year.
The overall superintendence, direction, and control of the National Eligibility−cum−
Entrance Test shall vest with the Medical Council of India. However, the Medical
Council of India, with the previous approval of the Central Government, shall select
organisation(s) to conduct 'National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for admission to
MBBS course.
(ii) In order to be eligible for admission to MBBS course for a particular academic
year, it shall be necessary for a candidate to obtain minimum of 50% (fifty percent)
marks in each paper of National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test held for the said
academic year. However, in respect of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
the Scheduled Tribes, and the Other Backward Classes, the minimum percentage
shall be 40% (forty percent) in each paper, and in respect of candidates with
locomotory disability of lower limbs, the minimum percentage marks shall be 45%
(forty−five percent) in each paper of National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test:
Provided when sufficient number of candidates belonging to respective categories fail
to secure minimum marks as prescribed in National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test
in any academic year for admission to MBBS course, the Central Government in
consultation with the Medical Council of India may at its discretion lower the
minimum marks required for admission to MBBS course for candidates belonging to
respective categories and marks so lowered by the Central Government shall be
applicable for the said year only.
(iii) The reservation of seats in medical colleges for respective categories shall be as
per applicable laws prevailing in States/Union Territories. An all India merit list as
well as State−wise merit list of the eligible candidates shall be prepared on the basis
of the marks obtained in National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test and candidates
shall be admitted to MBBS course from the said lists only.
(iv) No candidate who has failed to obtain the minimum eligibility marks as
prescribed in sub−clause (ii) above shall be admitted to MBBS course in the said
academic year.
(v) All admissions to MBBS course within the respective categories shall be based
solely on marks obtained in the National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test.” (emphasis
supplied)
3. Similarly, amendments to the Post Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000 were made.
The relevant portion of the amendments made are extracted hereunder:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
4

“No. MCI. 18(1)/2010−Med./49070. — In exercise of the powers conferred by Section
33 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), the Medical Council of
India with the previous approval of the Central Government hereby makes the
following regulations to further amend the ‘Postgraduate Medical Education
Regulations, 2000’, namely:
1. (i). These Regulations may be called 'the Postgraduate Medical Education
(Amendment) Regulations, 2010 (Part II)'.
(ii) They shall come into force from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the ‘Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000’, the following additions/
modifications/ deletions/ substitutions, shall be as indicated therein:
3. Clause 9 under the heading ‘SELECTION OF POSTGRADUATE STUDENTS’ shall be substituted
as under:
“9. Procedure for selection of candidate for Postgraduate courses shall be as follows:
(i) There shall be a single eligibility−cum−entrance examination, namely, National
Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for admission to Postgraduate Medical Courses in
each academic year. The overall superintendence, direction and control of National
Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test shall vest with Medical Council of India. However, the
Medical Council of India, with the previous approval of the Central Government shall
select organisation(s) to conduct National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for
admission to Postgraduate courses"'."
4. Similar notifications were issued by DCI providing for procedure for selection of candidates for
MBBS Course and Post−graduate Course and also for BDS and MDS. Thus, National Eligibility−
cum−Entrance Test (for short, ‘the NEET’) for admission to the MBBS course and the Post−graduate
course and similarly for BDS and MDS came to be introduced. Now the statutory provisions under
Section 10D of the Act of 1956 providing for uniform entrance examination for undergraduate and
post−graduate level which came into force on 24.5.2016. Section 10D is extracted hereunder:
“10D. Uniform entrance examination for undergraduate and post−graduate level.—
There shall be conducted a uniform entrance examination to all medical educational
institutions at the undergraduate level and post−graduate level through such
designated authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in such manner
as may be prescribed and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of
uniform entrance examination in the aforesaid manner:
Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of
this section shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at the
undergraduate level for the academic year 2016−17 conducted in accordance with any
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
5

regulations made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (whether
in Government Medical College or in a private Medical College) where such State has
not opted for such examination.” (emphasis supplied) Section 10D of the Dentists
Act, 1948, containing similar provisions with respect of uniform entrance
examination has also been inserted, same is extracted hereunder:
“10D. Uniform entrance examination for undergraduate and post−graduate
level.—There shall be conducted a uniform entrance examination to all dental
educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post−graduate level through
such designated authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in such
manner as may be prescribed and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct
of uniform entrance examination in the aforesaid manner: Provided that
notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of this section
shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at the undergraduate
level for the academic year 2016−17 conducted in accordance with any regulations
made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (whether in
Government Dental College or in a private Dental College) where such State has not
opted for such examination.”
5. The Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 have also been amended by
Regulations on Graduate Medical Education (Amendment) 2017. The admission to
the medical course eligibility criteria has been prescribed by amended Clause 4.
Following has been substituted:
“3. In Clause 4, under the heading Admission to the Medical Course−eligibility
criteria, and in sub−clause 4 (1) & (1A), the following shall be substituted:
4. Admission to the Medical Course−Eligibility Criteria: No candidate shall be
allowed to be admitted to the Medical Curriculum proper of first Bachelor of
Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery course until he /she has qualified the National
Eligibility Entrance Test, and he/she shall not be allowed to appear for the National
Eligibility−Cum−Entrance Test until:
(1) He/she shall complete the age of 17 years on or before 31 st December of the year
of admission to the MBBS.
(1A) He/She has obtained a minimum of marks in National Eligibility−Cum−
Entrance Test as prescribed in Clause 5 of Chapter II.” (emphasis supplied) In
Chapter II, Clause 5 under the heading “Procedure for selection to MBBS” has been
substituted by MCI in 2017 as under:
“7. In Chapter−II, Clause 5 under the heading “Procedure for selection to MBBS
course shall be as follows” shall be substituted as under:− “Procedure for selection to
MBBS course shall be as follows:” (1) There shall be a uniform entrance examination
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
6

to all medical educational institutions at the under graduate level namely ‘National
Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for admission to MBBS course in each academic year
and shall be conducted under overall supervision of the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India.
(2) The “designated authority” to conduct the ‘National Eligibility−Cum− Entrance
Test’ shall be the Central Board of Secondary Education or any other
body/organization so designated by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India, in consultation with the Medical Council of India.
(3) The language and manner of conducting the ‘National Eligibility−Cum−Entrance
Test’ shall be determined by the “designated authority” in consultation with the
Medical Council of India and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Government of India.
(4) In order to be eligible for admission to MBBS Course for a academic year, it shall
be necessary for a candidate to obtain minimum of marks at 50 th percentile in
‘National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test to MBBS course’ held for the said academic
year. However, in respect of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, Other Backward Classes, the minimum marks shall be at 40 th percentile. In
respect of candidates with benchmark disabilities specified under the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, in terms of Clause 4(3) above, the minimum
marks shall be at 45th percentile for General Category candidates and 40th percentile
for SC/ST/OBC candidates. The percentile shall be determined on the basis of
highest marks secured in the All−India common merit list for admission in ‘National
Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test for admission to MBBS course.
Provided when sufficient number of candidates in the respective categories fail to secure minimum
marks as prescribed in National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test held for any academic year for
admission to MBBS Course, the Central Government in consultation with Medical Council of India
may at its discretion lower the minimum marks required for admission to MBBS Course for
candidates belonging to respective categories and marks so lowered by the Central Government
shall be applicable for the said academic year only.
(5) The reservation of seats in Medical Colleges for respective categories shall be as per applicable
laws prevailing in States/Union Territories. An All India merit list as well as State/Union Territory−
wise merit list of the eligible candidates shall be prepared on the basis of marks obtained in
‘National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test and candidates shall be admitted to MBBS course from the
said lists only.
(6) No candidate who has failed to obtain the minimum eligibility marks as prescribed in Sub−
clause (4) above shall be admitted to MBBS course in the said academic year.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
7

(7) No authority/institution shall admit any candidate to the MBBS course in contravention of the
criteria/procedure as laid down by these Regulations and/or in violation of the judgments passed by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in respect of admissions. Any candidate admitted in
contravention/violation of aforesaid shall be discharged by the Council forthwith. The
authority/institution which grants admission to any student in contravention /violation of the
Regulations and/or the judgments passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, shall also be liable to face
such action as may be prescribed by the Council, including surrender of seats equivalent to the
extent of such admission made from its sanctioned intake capacity for the succeeding academic
year/years.
(8) All admission to MBBS course within the respective categories shall be based solely on the marks
obtained in the ‘National Eligibility−Cum−Entrance Test.” (emphasis supplied)
6. Initially, the matters filed in 2012−2013 were heard by a Bench of three Judges, and the matters
were decided vide judgment and order dated 18.7.2013. As per the majority opinion, the petitions
were allowed. The notifications issued by MCI and DCI providing for NEET were quashed. However,
the admissions, which were made, were not interfered with. Review petitions were filed, which were
entertained and were ultimately allowed on 11.4.2016, and judgment dated 18.7.2013 was recalled.
7. In Writ Petition (C) No.443 of 2016, prayer has been made to protect the rights of the petitioner−
institutions guaranteed under Articles 14, 15, 25, 26 and 30 of the Constitution of India. In Writ
Petition (C) No.750 of 2016, prayer is made to direct the respondents to conduct centralized
counselling for admission to all Graduate Medical and Dental Courses throughout the country. In
Transferred Case (C) No.25 of 2019, it is stated that vires of the provisions of Maharasthra Unaided
Private Professional Educational Institution (Regulation of Admissions & Fees) Act, 2015, applying
them to Unaided Private Minority Professional Educational Institutions are bad in law. In S.L.P. (C)
No.28223 of 2016, provisions have been questioned on the ground that they cannot take away the
rights guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(g) and 30 read with Articles 25, 26 and 29(1) of the
Constitution of India.
8. Initially, the questions were raised that MCI and DCI could not have introduced NEET as the
same offends the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India
and the rights of religious and linguistic minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice as guaranteed under Article 30 Constitution of India. Thus, subordinate
legislation could not have overriding effect over the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles
25, 26, 29(1), and 30 of the Constitution of India. Now the amendment made could not take away or
abridge the aforesaid rights of minorities. The right to admit students is one of the fundamental
rights, thus, rider of clearing NEET examination could not have been imposed.
9. It was urged on behalf of petitioners that the impugned notifications violate the fundamental
rights of an unaided minority institution to “establish and administer educational institutions of
their choice” protected under Article 30 read with Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India,
which includes the right to admit students of their own choice. The doctrine of limited Government
provides that a citizen's liberty and autonomy is the central notion of the Constitution of India and
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
8

there is an inherent limitation on the State's involvement in matters of admissions of students. The
NEET prescribes no alternative to the institution, impinges upon the fundamental rights of an
unaided minority institution to establish and administer educational institution of their choice.
10. It was further urged on behalf of petitioners that State has no power to compel an unaided
minority institution to admit students through a single centralized national examination such as
NEET. The unaided minority professional colleges have the fundamental rights to choose the
method and manner in which to admit its students, subject to satisfying the triple test of having a
fair, transparent, and non−exploitative process.
11. It was also argued on behalf of petitioners that they have a time− tested admission procedure
without any complaints. Their process is fair and transparent, and they have a fundamental right to
protect autonomy and reputation by continuing to admit students using their admission process.
The NEET cannot be the only parameter to determine the merit of a student. Some of the
institutions are providing best medical professional by having their procedure for admission. They
have fundamental rights under Articles 19(1)(g) and 30(1) of the Constitution to conduct and
manage the affairs of the institution. The State, while imposing reasonable restrictions, can fix the
threshold criterion of merit, but cannot restrict the petitioners from having any additional criteria of
merit over and above the threshold fixed by the State. The restriction violates the test of
proportionality.
12. The petitioners have also referred to the existing position concerning centralised examination for
professional courses in India and internationally, to hold entrance examination cannot be
compulsion, it has to be voluntarily. They have relied upon Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) −
a system of examination for admission in the Law Colleges. Reference has also been made to the
admission process followed in Indian Institute of Technology (IITs), National Institute of
Technology (NITs) and Indian Institute of Management (IIMs). NEET is the first of its kind, both in
India and globally, where all institutions are compelled by the State to follow a single admission
procedure. Some of the institutions are having an excellent record.
They follow the gurukul tradition. With the introduction of NEET in 2016−17, institutions have been
compelled to admit students through NEET instead of their method. Some of them have the All
India Entrance Test. They have their unique procedure of admission for MBBS as well as Post
Graduation. The system of examination of some of the institutions is wider on All India Basis, and
they test general ability also, whereas, in NEET, evaluation is based on three subjects, namely,
Physics, Biology, and Chemistry. They have an elaborate procedure of the assessment, and they do
not admit students only based on their theoretical knowledge. Some of them are the best medical
educational institutions in the country. There is not even a single allegation of maladministration
against some of the reputed institutions. The principles, which govern the selection, are eligibility,
suitability, and distributive justice. The selection of candidates is an important factor to the medical
colleges to suit their requirements in a particular field.
13. There are various issues which have arisen according to the admission given for post−graduate
examination after the introduction of NEET. Now, in some of the specialised institutions, they are
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
9

not getting good doctors to take care of patients, for example, in the Oncology Department. Some of
the candidates are not able to bear the burden of the procedure and have expressed their inability to
go with very sick patients. Some of them were not able to undertake procedures in a sterile manner
to avoid infections. Similar is the position in other super−speciality departments. There are
complaints of lack of clinical competence among students admitted to speciality courses like general
medicine.
14. The petitioners further submitted that they have a fundamental right to admit students of their
own choice under Article 30 of the Constitution. It is submitted that the admission procedure
adopted by them passes the triple test, i.e., fair, transparent, and non− exploitative. Various orders
were passed by this Court recognising fair method adopted in individual institutions while admitting
students through their admission procedure as apparent from interim orders passed in the years
1993, 1994, 1995, and 1998.
15. This Court on 28.4.2016 passed an order in Sankalp Charitable Trust and Anr. v. Union of India
and Ors., (Writ Petition (C) No.261 of 2016), in which it was clarified that order passed in the said
matter shall not affect the hearing of the petitions. Most of petitions remained pending after recall of
the order earlier passed by this Court.
As per appellants, the ratio laid down in Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Ors. v.
State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors., (2016) 7 SCC 353, is not applicable. While deciding the said case,
this Court did not deal with the rights of unaided minority institutions. A Division Bench of Madras
High Court held that the procedure of admission of some of the institutions is fair, transparent and
non− exploitative. Reliance has been placed on the T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Ors. v. State of
Karnataka and Ors., (2002) 8 SCC 481 to contend that State have minimal interference and if
possible, to be made only to maintain academic standards. The right to admit students is one of the
fundamental rights recognized by this Court. The challenge in Modern Dental College and Research
Centre (supra) was to the State level examination, i.e., the Common Entrance Test (CET). The
holding of NEET would not be in the interest of the academic standard of premier medical
institutions in the country. The change in admission procedure of students would result in a sharp
decline in the current standards of excellence in education maintained at the institution, that would
not be in public interest. The admission procedure followed by petitioners is head and shoulders
above the NEET. The concept of limited government has also been relied upon by referring to the
decisions in Gobind v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr., (1975) 2 SCC 148 and K.S. Puttaswamy v.
Union of India, (2017) 10 SCC 1.
Reliance has also been placed on the Islamic Academy of Education and Ors. v. State of Karnataka
and Ors., (2003) 6 SCC 697 and P.A. Inamdar and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Ors., (2005) 6
SCC 537.
16. It was argued that provisions of the MCI and DCI Acts and regulations which have been
amended during the pendency of the petitions cannot take away the right of the institutions to admit
their students under Article 30 of the Constitution of India. Thus, the prescription of NEET cannot
be said to be permissible for the institutions in question.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
10

17. On behalf of respondents, reliance has been placed on Sankalp Charitable Trust and Anr. v.
Union of India and Ors., (2016) 7 SCC 487, Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra) and
P.A. Inamdar (supra). It was also argued that Section 10D has been inserted in the Act of 1956 it
provides that there shall be a uniform common entrance conducted by the designated authority. The
main reasoning of this Court in Christian Medical College Vellore v. Union of India, (2014) 2 SCC
305, which decision has been recalled, was that uniform common entrance examination could not
be introduced by way of subordinate legislation and under the Act of 1956 and MCI had no power to
conduct the said examination. After the introduction of Section 10D, both the said lacunas have
been plugged. The introduction of NEET is constitutionally valid. In Modern Dental College and
Research Centre (supra), the Court considered the question of conduct of examination by private
medical colleges in the State of Madhya Pradesh for admitting students in their colleges. In State of
Madhya Pradesh v.
Jainarayan Chouksey and Ors., (2016) 9 SCC 412, while deciding the contempt petition it was
observed that judgment dated 2.5.2016 passed in the case of Modern Dental College and Research
Centre (supra), held that admission should be made through a centralised procedure to be
conducted by the State Government. The Court again in the State of Maharashtra v. D.Y. Patil
Vidyapeeth and Ors., (2016) 9 SCC 401, decided on 28.9.2016 reiterated that the decision in Modern
Dental College and Research Centre (supra) makes it unequivocally clear that centralised
counselling is an adjunct and part of the uniform common entrance test. The notifications were also
challenged by minority institutions, deemed Universities, and other private institutions by filing
writ petitions in this Court. The Court in the judgment dated 9.5.2017 in Dar−us−Salam Educational
Trust and Ors.
v. Medical Council of India and Ors., (Writ Petition (C) No.267 of 2017), observed that common
counselling did not in any manner affect the right of minority institutions to admit students of their
minority community. As such, their right to admit students of their community was fully protected.
The institutions were entitled to fill students of minority quota in their respective medical colleges.
NEET is a qualifying examination to determine merit and also ensure fair procedure and equality of
opportunity that most meritorious candidates get admitted in the medicine and dental courses.
Reliance has been placed on Yatinkumar Jasubhai Patel and Ors. v. State of Gujarat and Ors., (2019)
10 SCC 1, in which the Court considered the question of institutional preference/reservation after
introduction of NEET, and observed that introduction of NEET did not affect 50% State quota seats
in PG medicine course. It may be filled based on institutional reservation.
18. The primary issue is whether by providing centralised examination system – NEET for
admission to MBBS, PG, BDS and MDS by virtue of the provisions made in the Act and regulations,
there is violation of fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 19(1)(g), 25, 26, 29(1) and 30 of
the Constitution of India.
19. We first advert to take note that various decisions rendered by this Court in respect of the right
of minority as stated under Article 30 of the Constitution of India.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
11

20. In Re The Kerala Education Bill, 1957, AIR 1958 SC 956, question arose concerning right of the
Government to prescribe qualification to be possessed by the incumbents for appointment as
teachers in aided or recognized schools. The State Public Service Commission was empowered to
select candidates for appointment as teachers in Government and aided schools. The Court opined
that minority cannot ask for the aid or recognition for an educational institution without competent
teachers and fair standards. The choice does not necessarily militate against the claim of the State to
insist on reasonable regulations to ensure the excellence of the institutions to be aided or even
recognized. The Court held thus:
“(29) Their grievances are thus stated: The gist of the right of administration of a
school is the power of appointment, control, and dismissal of teachers and other staff.
But under the said Bill such power of management is practically taken away. Thus the
manager must submit annual statements (Cl.
5). The fixed assets of the aided schools are frozen and cannot be dealt with except
with the permission of the authorised officer (Cl. 6). No educational agency of an
aided school can appoint a manager of its choice and the manager is completely
under the control of the authorised officer, for he must keep accounts in the manner
he is told to do and to give periodical inspection of them and on the closure of the
school the accounts must be made over to the authorised officer (Cl. 7).
All fees etc. collected will have to be made over to the Government (Cl. 8(3)). Government will take
up the task of paying the teachers and the non−teaching staff (Cl. 9). Government will prescribe the
qualification of teachers (Cl. 10). The school authorities cannot appoint a single teacher of their
choice, but must appoint persons out of the panel settled by the Public Service Commission (Cl. 11).
The school authorities must provide amenities to teachers and cannot dismiss, remove, reduce, or
even suspend a teacher without the previous sanction of the authorised officer (Cl. 12). …… (31) We
are thus faced with a problem of considerable complexity apparently difficult of solution. There is,
on the one hand the minority rights under Art. 30(1) to establish and administer educational
institutions of their choice and the duty of the Government to promote education, there is, on the
other side the obligation of the State under Art. 45 to endeavour to introduce free and compulsory
education. We have to reconcile between these two conflicting interests and to give effect to both if
that is possible and bring about a synthesis between the two. The directive principles cannot ignore
or override the fundamental rights but must, as we have said, subserve the fundamental rights. We
have already observed that Art. 30(1) gives two rights to the minorities, (1) to establish and (2) to
administer educational institutions of their choice. The right to administer cannot obviously include
the right to maladminister. The minority cannot surely ask for aid or recognition for an educational
institution run by them in unhealthy surroundings, without any competent teachers, possessing any
semblance of qualification, and which does not maintain even a fair standard of teaching or which
teaches matters subversive of the welfare of the scholars. It stands to reason, then, that the
constitutional right to administer an educational institution of their choice does not necessarily
militate against the claim of the State to insist that in order to grant aid the State may prescribe
reasonable regulations to ensure the excellence of the institutions to be aided. Learned Attorney−
General concedes that reasonable regulations may certainly be imposed by the State as a condition
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
12

for aid or even for recognition... ...Clauses 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, and 20 relate to the management
of aided schools. Some of these provisions, e.g., 7, 10, 11(1), 12(1)(2)(3) and (5) may easily be
regarded as reasonable regulations or conditions for the grant of aid. Clauses 9, 11(2) and 12(4) are,
however, objected to as going much beyond the permissible limit. It is said that by taking over the
collections of fees etc., and by undertaking to pay the salaries of the teachers and other staff the
Government is in reality confiscating the school fund and taking away the prestige of the school, for
none will care for the school authority. Likewise Cl. 11 takes away an obvious item of management,
for the manager cannot appoint any teacher at all except out of the panel to be prepared by the
Public Service Commission which, apart from the question of its power of taking up such duties,
may not be qualified at all to select teachers who will be acceptable to religious denominations and
in particular sub−cl. (2) of that clause is objectionable for it thrusts upon educational institutions of
religious minorities teachers of Scheduled Castes who may have no knowledge of the tenets of their
religion and may be otherwise weak educationally. Power of dismissal, removal, reduction in rank,
or suspension is an index of the right of management, and that is taken away by Cl. 12(4). These are,
no doubt, serious inroads on the right of administration and appear perilously near violating that
right. But considering that those provisions are applicable to all educational institutions and that the
impugned parts of Cls. 9, 11 and 12 are designed to give protection and security to the ill paid
teachers who are engaged in rendering service to the nation and protect the backward classes, we
are prepared, as at present advised, to treat these clauses 9, 11(2) and 12(4) as permissible
regulations which the State may impose on the minorities as a condition for granting aid to their
educational institutions. We, however, find it impossible to support Cls. 14 and 15 of the said Bill as
mere Regulations. The provisions of those clauses may be totally destructive of the rights under Art.
30(1). It is true that the right to aid is not implicit in Art. 30(1) but the provisions of those clauses, if
submitted to on account of their factual compulsion as condition of aid, may easily be violative of
Art. 30(1) of the Constitution. Learned Counsel for the State of Kerala recognizes that Cls. 14 and 15
of the Bill may annihilate the minority communities' right to manage educational institutions of
their choice but submits that the validity of those clauses is not the subject matter of question 2. But,
as already explained, all newly established schools seeking aid or recognition are, by Cl. 3(5), made
subject to all the provisions of the Act. Therefore, in a discussion as to the constitutional validity of
Cl. 3(5) a discussion of the validity of the other clauses of the Bill becomes relevant, not as and by
way of a separate item but in determining the validity of the provisions of Cl. 3(5). In our opinion,
sub−cl. 3 of Cl. 8 and Cls. 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 being merely regulatory do not offend Art. 30(1), but
the provisions of sub−cl. (5) of cl. 3 by making the aided educational institutions subject to Cls. 14
and 15 as conditions for the grant of aid do offend against Art. 30(1) of the Constitution.” (emphasis
supplied)
21. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai and Ors. v. State of Bombay and Anr., (1963) 3 SCR 837, the Court
again considered the matter and observed that educational institutions cater to the needs of the
citizens or section thereof. Regulation made in the real interests of efficiency of instruction,
discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order, and the like may undoubtedly be imposed.
Such regulations are not restrictive on the substance of the right, which is guaranteed, they secure
the proper functioning of the institution in the matter of education. It was also observed that
regulation must satisfy a dual test − the test of reasonableness and that it is regulative of the
educational character of the institution and is conducive to making the institution a capable vehicle
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
13

of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it. In Rev. Father W. Proost
and Ors. v. State of Bihar and Ors., AIR 1969 SC 465, the Court observed thus:
“8. In our opinion, the width of Article 30(1) cannot be cut down by introducing in it
considerations on which Article 29(1) is based. The latter article is a general
protection which is given to minorities to conserve their language, script, or culture.
The former is a special right to minorities to establish educational institutions of their
choice. This choice is not limited to institution seeking to conserve language, script,
or culture, and the choice is not taken away if the minority community having
established an educational institution of its choice also admits members of other
communities. That is a circumstance irrelevant for the application of Article 30(1)
since no such limitation is expressed and none can be implied. The two articles create
two separate rights, although it is possible that they may meet in a given case.”
22. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Anr., (1974) 1 SCC
717, a college was run by the minority.
A Bench of 9−Judges of this Court considered the question whether Sections 40 and 41 of the
Gujarat University Act, 1949 violated Section 30, which provided all colleges within the University
area would be governed by the statutes of the University which may provide for minimum
educational qualifications for teachers and tutorial staff.
The University may approve the appointments of teachers to coordinate and regulate the facilities
provided and expenditure incurred. The Court opined that regulation which serves the interests of
the teachers are of paramount importance in good administration, education should be a great
cohesive force in developing integrity of the nation, thus:
“19. The entire controversy centres round the extent of the right of the religious and
linguistic minorities to administer their educational institutions. The right to
administer is said to consist of four principal matters. First is the right to choose its
managing or governing body. It is said that the founders of the minority institution
have faith and confidence in their own committee or body consisting of persons
elected by them. Second is the right to choose its teachers. It is said that minority
institutions want teachers to have compatibility with the ideals, aims, and aspirations
of the institution. Third is the right not to be compelled to refuse admission to
students. In other words, the minority institutions want to have the right to admit
students of their choice subject to reasonable regulations about academic
qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its properties and assets for the benefit of its
own institution.
20. The right conferred on the religious and linguistic minorities to administer
educational institutions of their choice is not an absolute right. This right is not free
from regulation. Just as regulatory measures are necessary for maintaining the
educational character and content of minority institutions, similarly, regulatory
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
14

measures are necessary for ensuring orderly, efficient, and sound administration.
Das, C.J., in the Kerala Education Bill case (supra) 1959 SCR 995:
AIR 1958 SC 956, summed up in one sentence the true meaning of the right to
administer by saying that the right to administer is not the right to mal−administer.
30. Educational institutions are temples of learning. The virtues of human
intelligence are mastered and harmonised by education. Where there is complete
harmony between the teacher and the taught, where the teacher imparts and the
student receives, where there is complete dedication of the teacher and the taught in
learning, where there is discipline between the teacher and the taught, where both
are worshippers of learning, no discord or challenge will arise. An educational
institution runs smoothly when the teacher and the taught are engaged in the
common ideal of pursuit of knowledge. It is, therefore, manifest that the appointment
of teachers is an important part in educational institutions. The qualifications and the
character of the teachers are really important. The minority institutions have the
right to administer institutions. This right implies the obligation and duty of the
minority institutions to render the very best to the students. In the right of
administration, checks, and balances in the shape of regulatory measures are
required to ensure the appointment of good teachers and their conditions of service.
The right to administer is to be tempered with regulatory measures to facilitate smooth
administration. The best administration will reveal no trace or colour of minority. A minority
institution should shine in exemplary eclectism in the administration of the institution. The best
compliment that can be paid to a minority institution is that it does not rest on or proclaim its
minority character.
31. Regulations which will serve the interests of the students, regulations which will serve the
interests of the teachers are of paramount importance in good administration. Regulations in the
interest of efficiency of teachers, discipline, and fairness in administration are necessary for
preserving harmony among affiliated institutions.
46. The ultimate goal of a minority institution too imparting general secular education is
advancement of learning. This Court has consistently held that it is not only permissible but also
desirable to regulate everything in educational and academic matters for achieving excellence and
uniformity in standards of education.
47. In the field of administration it is not reasonable to claim that minority institutions will have
complete autonomy. Checks on the administration may be necessary in order to ensure that the
administration is efficient and sound and will serve the academic needs of the institution. The right
of a minority to administer its educational institution involves, as part of it, a correlative duty of
good administration.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
15

90. We may now deal with the scope and ambit of the right guaranteed by clause (1) of Article 30.
The clause confers a right on all minorities, whether they are based on religion or language, to
establish and administer educational instructions of their choice. The right conferred by the clause
is in absolute terms and is not subject to restrictions, as in the case of rights conferred by Article 19
of the Constitution. The right of the minorities to administer educational institutions does not,
however, prevent the making of reasonable regulations in respect of those institutions. The
regulations have necessarily to be made in the interest of the institution as a minority educational
institution. They have to be so designed as to make it an effective vehicle for imparting education.
The right to administer educational institutions can plainly not include the right to maladminister.
Regulations can be made to prevent the housing of an educational institution in unhealthy
surroundings as also to prevent the setting up or continuation of an educational institution without
qualified teachers. The State can prescribe regulations to ensure the excellence of the institution.
Prescription of standards for educational institutions does not militate against the right of the
minority to administer the institutions. Regulations made in the true interests of efficiency of
instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order, and the like may undoubtedly be
imposed. Such regulations are not restrictions on the substance of the right, which is guaranteed:
they secure the proper functioning of the institution, in matters educational [see observations of
Shah, J. in Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai (supra), [(1963 3 SCR 837] p. 850]. Further, as observed by
Hidyatullah, C.J. in the case of Very Rev. Mother Provincial (supra) [(1971) 1 SCR 734], the
standards concern the body politic and are dictated by considerations of the advancement of the
country and its people. Therefore, if universities establish syllabi for examinations, they must be
followed, subject, however, to special subjects which the institutions may seek to teach, and to a
certain extent, the State may also regulate the conditions of employment of teachers and the health
and hygiene of students. Such regulations do not bear directly upon management as such, although
they may indirectly affect it. Yet the right of the State to regulate education, educational standards,
and allied matters cannot be denied. The minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the
standards of excellence expected of educational institutions, or under the guise of exclusive right of
management, to decline to follow the general pattern. While the management must be left to them,
they may be compelled to keep in step with others.
92. A regulation which is designed to prevent maladministration of an educational institution
cannot be said to offend Clause (1) of Article 30. At the same time, it has to be ensured that under
the power of making regulations, nothing is done as would detract from the character of the
institution as a minority educational institution or which would impinge upon the rights of the
minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The right conferred
by Article 30(1) is intended to be real and effective and not a mere pious and abstract sentiment; it is
a promise of reality and not a teasing illusion. Such a right cannot be allowed to be whittled down by
any measure masquerading as a regulation. As observed by this Court in the case of Rev. Sidhajbhai
Sabhai (supra) [(1963 3 SCR 837], regulations which may lawfully be imposed either by legislative
or executive action as a condition of receiving grant or of recognition must be directed to making the
institution while retaining its character as minority institution effective as an educational
institution. Such regulation must satisfy a dual test — the test of reasonableness, and the test that it
is regulative of the educational character of the institution and is conducive to making the
institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
16

to it.
94. If a request is made for the affiliation or recognition of an educational institution, it is implicit in
the request that the educational institution would abide by the regulations which are made by the
authority granting affiliation or recognition. The said authority can always prescribe regulations and
insist that they should be complied with before it would grant affiliation or recognition to an
educational institution. To deny the power of making regulations to the authority concerned would
result in robbing the concept of affiliation or recognition of its real essence. No institution can claim
affiliation or recognition until it conforms to a certain standard. The fact that the institution is of the
prescribed standard indeed inheres in the very concept of affiliation or recognition. It is, therefore,
permissible for the authority concerned to prescribe regulations which must be complied with
before an institution can seek and retain affiliation and recognition. Question then arises whether
there is any limitation on the prescription of regulations for minority educational institutions. So far
as this aspect is concerned, the authority prescribing the regulations must bear in mind that the
Constitution has guaranteed a fundamental right to the minorities for establishing and
administering their educational institutions. Regulations made by the authority concerned should
not impinge upon that right. Balance has, therefore, to be kept between the two objectives, that of
ensuring the standard of excellence of the institution and that of preserving the right of the
minorities to establish and administer their educational institutions. Regulations which embrace
and reconcile the two objectives can be considered to be reasonable.” (emphasis supplied) The Court
held that it is permissible for the State to prescribe qualifications for teachers. It observed:
“176. Recognition or affiliation is granted on the basis of the excellence of an
educational institution, namely, that it has reached the educational standard set up
by the university. Recognition or affiliation is sought for the purpose of enabling the
students in an educational institution to sit for an examination to be conducted by
the university and to obtain a degree conferred by the university. For that purpose,
the students should have to be coached in such a manner so as to attain the standard
of education prescribed by the university. Recognition or affiliation creates an
interest in the university to ensure that the educational institution is maintained for
the purpose intended and any regulation which will subserve or advance that purpose
will be reasonable and no educational institution established and administered by a
religious or linguistic minority can claim recognition or affiliation without submitting
to those regulations. That is the price of recognition or affiliation: but this does not
mean that it should submit to a regulation stipulating for surrender of a right or
freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, which is unrelated to the purpose of
recognition or affiliation. In other words, recognition or affiliation is a facility which
the university grants to an educational institution, for the purpose of enabling the
students there to sit for an examination to be conducted by the university in the
prescribed subjects and to obtain the degree conferred by the university, and
therefore, it stands to reason to hold that no regulation which is unrelated to the
purpose can be imposed. If besides recognition or affiliation, an educational
institution conducted by a religious minority is granted aid, further regulations for
ensuring that the aid is utilized for the purpose for which it is granted will be
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
17

permissible. The heart of the matter is that no educational institution established by
a religious or linguistic minority can claim total immunity from regulations by the
legislature or the university if it wants affiliation or recognition, but the character of
the permissible regulations must depend upon their purpose. As we said, such
regulations will be permissible if they are relevant to the purpose of securing or
promoting the object of recognition or affiliation. There will be borderline cases
where it is difficult to decide whether a regulation really subserves the purpose of
recognition or affiliation. But that does not affect the question of principle. In every
case, when the reasonableness of a regulation comes up for consideration before the
Court, the question to be asked and answered is whether the regulation is calculated
to subserve or will in effect subserve the purpose of recognition or affiliation, namely,
the excellence of the institution as a vehicle for general secular education to the
minority community and to other persons who resort to it. The question whether a
regulation is in the general interest of the public has no relevance if it does not
advance the excellence of the institution as a vehicle for general secular education as,
ex−hypothesi, the only permissible regulations are those which secure the
effectiveness of the purpose of the facility, namely, the excellence of the educational
institutions in respect of their educational standards. This is the reason why this
Court has time and again said that the question whether a particular regulation is
calculated to advance the general public interest is of no consequence if it is not
conducive to the interests of the minority community and those persons who resort
to it.
197. On the second question, I have nothing significant to add to what has fallen from
My Lord the Chief Justice. I am in entire agreement with the view that, although,
Articles 29 and 30 may supplement each other so far as certain rights of minorities
are concerned, yet, Article 29 of the Constitution does not, in any way, impose a limit
on the kind or character of education which a minority may choose to impart through
its Institution to the children of its own members or to those of others who may
choose to send their children to its schools. In other words, it has a right to impart a
general secular education. I would, however, like to point out that, as rights and
duties are correlative, it follows, from the extent of this wider right of a minority
under Article 30(1) to impart even general or non−denominational secular education
to those who may not follow its culture or subscribe to its beliefs, that, when a
minority Institution decides to enter this wider educational sphere of national
education, it, by reason of this free choice itself, could be deemed to opt to adhere to
the needs of the general pattern of such education in the country, at least whenever
that choice is made in accordance with statutory provisions. Its choice to impart an
education intended to give a secular orientation or character to its education
necessarily entails its assent to the imperative needs of the choice made by the State
about the kind of “secular” education which promotes national integration or the
elevating objectives set out in the preamble to our Constitution, and the best way of
giving it. If it is part of a minority's rights to make such a choice, it should also be part
of its obligations, which necessarily follow from the choice to adhere to the general
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
18

pattern. The logical basis of such a choice is that the particular minority Institution,
which chooses to impart such general secular education, prefers that higher range of
freedom where, according to the poet Rabindranath Tagore, "the narrow domestic
walls" which constitute barriers between various sections of the nation will crumble
and fall. It may refuse to accept the choice made by the State of the kind of secular
education the State wants or of the way in which it should be given. But, in that event,
should it not be prepared to forego the benefits of recognition by the State? The State
is bound to permit and protect the choice of the minority Institution, whatever that
might be. But, can it be compelled to give it a treatment different from that given to
other Institutions making such a choice?
221. Evidently, what was meant was that the right to exclusive management of the
institution is separable from the right to determine the character of education and its
standards. This may explain why "standards" of education were spoken as "not part
of management" at all. It meant that the right to manage, having been conferred in
absolute terms, could not be interfered with at all although the object of that
management could be determined by a general pattern to be laid down by the State,
which could prescribe the syllabi and standards of education. Speaking for myself, I
find it very difficult to separate the objects and standards of teaching from a right to
determine who should teach and what their qualifications should be. Moreover, if the
“standards of education” are not part of management, it is difficult to see how they
are exceptions to the principle of freedom of management from control. Again, if
what is aimed at directly is to be distinguished from an indirect effect of it, the
security of tenure of teachers and provisions intended to ensure fair and equitable
treatment for them by the management of an institution would also not be directly
aimed at interference with its management. They could more properly be viewed as
designed to improve and ensure the excellence of teachers available at the institution,
and, therefore, to raise the general standard of education. I think that it is enough for
us to distinguish this case on the ground that the provisions to be interpreted by us
are different, although, speaking for myself, I feel bound to say, with great respect,
that I am unable to accept every proposition found stated there as correct. In that
case, the provisions of the Kerala University Act 9 of 1969, considered there were
inescapable for the minority institutions which claimed the right to be free from their
operation. As I have already observed, in the case before us, Section 38−B of the Act
provides the petitioning College before us with a practically certain mode of escape
from the compulsiveness of provisions other than Sections 5, 40, and 41 of the Act if
claims made on its behalf are correct.
232. Even if Article 30(1) of the Constitution is held to confer absolute and unfettered
rights of management upon minority institutions, subject only to absolutely minimal
and negative controls in the interests of health and law and order, it could not be
meant to exclude a greater degree of regulation and control when a minority
institution enters the wider sphere of general secular and non−denominational
education, largely employs teachers who are not members of the particular minority
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
19

concerned, and when it derives large parts of its income from the fees paid by those
who are not members of the particular minority in question. Such greater degree of
control could be justified by the need to secure the interests of those who are affected
by the management of the minority institution and the education it imparts but who
are not members of the minority in management. In other words, the degree of
reasonably permissible control must vary from situation to situation. For the reasons
already given above, I think that, apart from Sections 5, 40 and 41 of the Act, which
directly and unreasonably impinge upon the rights of the petitioning minority
managed college, protected by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, I do not think that
the other provisions have that effect. On the situation under consideration before us,
the minority institution affected by the enactment has, upon the claims put forward
on its behalf, a means of escape from the impugned provisions other than Sections 5,
40 and 41 of the Act by resorting to Section 38B of the Act.” (emphasis supplied)
23. In The Gandhi Faiz−e−am College, Shahjahanpur v. University of Agra and Anr.,
(1975) 2 SCC 283, the Court considered whether statute framed by University of Agra
infringed fundamental rights of the minority community and observed thus:
“16. The discussion throws us back to a closer study of Statute 14−A to see if it cuts
into the flesh of the management’s right or merely tones up its health and habits. The
two requirements the University asks for are that the managing body (whatever its
name) must take in (a) the Principal of the College; (b) its seniormost teacher. Is this
desideratum dismissible as biting into the autonomy of management or tenable as
ensuring the excellence of the institution without injuring the essence of the right?
On a careful reflection and conscious of the constitutional dilemma, we are inclined
to the view that this case falls on the valid side of the delicate line. Regulation which
restricts is bad, but regulation which facilitates is good. Where does this fine
distinction lie? No rigid formula is possible, but a flexible test is feasible. Where the
object and effect is to improve the tone and temper of the administration without
forcing on it a stranger, however superb his virtues be, where the directive is not to
restructure the governing body but to better its performance by a marginal catalytic
induction, where no external authority's fiat or approval or outside nominee is made
compulsory to validate the Management Board but inclusion of an internal key
functionary appointed by the autonomous management alone is asked for, the
provision is salutary and saved, being not a diktat eroding the freedom of the
freedom."
(emphasis supplied) The majority negated the challenge. It was held that regulation
which restricts is bad, but provision which facilitates is good.
24. In Frank Anthony Public School Employees' Association v. Union of India and
others, (1986) 4 SCC 707, question arose whether teachers and other employees
working in an unaided school were entitled to same pay−scale, allowances, and
benefits. The Court allowed the petition and opined thus:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
20

“16. The excellence of the instruction provided by an institution would depend
directly on the excellence of the teaching staff, and in turn, that would depend on the
quality and the contentment of the teachers. Conditions of service pertaining to
minimum qualifications of teachers, their salaries, allowances and other conditions of
service which ensure security, contentment and decent living standards to teachers
and which will consequently enable them to render better service to the institution
and the pupils cannot surely be said to be violative of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution. The management of a minority
Educational Institution cannot be permitted under the guise of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, to oppress or exploit its employees
any more than any other private employee. Oppression or exploitation of the teaching
staff of an educational institution is bound to lead, inevitably, to discontent and
deterioration of the standard of instruction imparted in the institution affecting
adversely the object of making the institution an effective vehicle of education for the
minority community or other persons who resort to it. The management of minority
institution cannot complain of invasion of the fundamental right to administer the
institution when it denies the members of its staff the opportunity to achieve the very
object of Article 30(1) which is to make the institution an effective vehicle of
education.” (emphasis supplied)
25. In Bihar State Madarasa Education Board, Patna v. Madarasa Hanfia Arabic
College, Jamalia and others, (1990) 1 SCC 428, the Court held that minorities have
the right to establish and administer educational institution of their own choice. Still,
they have no right to maladminister, and the State has the power to regulate the
management and administration of such institutions in the interest of educational
need and discipline of the institution. The Court held thus:
“6. The question which arises for consideration is whether Section 7(2)(n) which
confers power on the Board to dissolve the Managing Committee of an aided and
recognised Madarasa institution violates the minorities constitutional right to
administer its educational institution according to their choice. This Court has all
along held that though the minorities have right to establish and administer
educational institution of their own choice but they have no right to maladminister
and the State has power to regulate management and administration of such
institutions in the interest of educational need and discipline of the institution. Such
regulation may have indirect effect on the absolute right of minorities but that would
not violate Article 30(1) of the Constitution as it is the duty of the State to ensure
efficiency in educational institutions. The State has, however, no power to completely
take over the management of a minority institution. Under the guise of regulating the
educational standards to secure efficiency in institution, the State is not entitled to
frame rules or regulations compelling the management to surrender its right of
administration. In State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, (1970) 2 SCC 417,
Section 63(1) of the Kerala University Act, 1969 which conferred power on the
government to take over the management of a minority institution on its default in
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
21

carrying out the directions of the State Government was declared ultra vires on the
ground that the provisions interfered with the constitutional right of a minority to
administer its institution. Minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the
standard of excellence on the pretext of their exclusive right of management but at
the same time their constitutional right to administer their institutions cannot be
completely taken away by superseding or dissolving Managing Committee or by
appointing ad hoc committees in place thereof. In the instant case Section 7(2)(n) is
clearly violative of constitutional right of minorities under Article 30(1) of the
Constitution insofar as it provides for dissolution of Managing Committee of a
Madarasa. We agree with the view taken by the High Court.” (emphasis supplied)
26. In St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, (1992) 1 SCC 558, concerning
admission process adopted by aided minority institutions, various questions were
raised thus:
“41. It was contended that St. Stephen’s College after being affiliated to the Delhi
University has lost its minority character. The argument was based on some of the
provisions in the Delhi University Act and the Ordinances made thereunder. It was
said that the students are admitted to the University and not to the College as such.
But we find no substance in the contention. In the first place, it may be stated that the
State or any instrumentality of the State cannot deprive the character of the
institution, founded by a minority community by compulsory affiliation since Article
30(1) is a special right to minorities to establish educational institutions of their
choice. The minority institution has a distinct identity and the right to administer
with continuance of such identity cannot be denied by coercive action. Any such
coercive action would be void being contrary to the constitutional guarantee. The
right to administer is the right to conduct and manage the affairs of the institution.
This right is exercised by a body of persons in whom the founders have faith and
confidence. Such a management body of the institution cannot be displaced or
reorganised if the right is to be recognised and maintained. Reasonable regulations
however, are permissible but regulations should be of regulatory nature and not of
abridgment of the right guaranteed under Article 30(1).
60. The right to select students for admission is a part of administration. It is indeed
an important facet of administration. This power also could be regulated but the
regulation must be reasonable just like any other regulation. It should be conducive
to the welfare of the minority institution or for the betterment of those who resort to
it. The Bombay Government order which prevented the schools using English as the
medium of instruction from admitting students who have a mother tongue other than
English was held to be invalid since it restricted the admission pattern of the schools
[State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society, (1955) 1 SCR 568]. The Gujarat
Government direction to the minority run college to reserve 80 per cent of seats for
government selected candidates with a threat to withdraw the grant−in−aid and
recognition was struck down as infringing the fundamental right guaranteed to
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
22

minorities under Article 30(1) of the Constitution [Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of
Bombay, (1963) 3 SCR 837]. In Rt. Rev. Magr. Mark Netto v. State of Kerala, (1979) 1
SCC 23, the denial of permission to the management of a minority school to admit
girl students was held to be bad.
The Regional Deputy Director in that case refused to give sanction for admission of girl students on
two grounds: (i) that the school was not opened as a mixed school and that the school has been run
purely as a boys school for 25 years; and
(ii) that there was facility for the education of girls of the locality in a nearby girls school which was
established by the Muslims and was also a minority institution. This Court noted that the Christian
community in the locality wanted their girls also to receive education in the school maintained
specially by their own community. They did not think it in their interest to send their children to the
Muslim girls school run by the other minority community. The withholding of permission for
admission of girl students in the boys minority school was violative of Article 30(1). It was also
observed that the rule sanctioning such refusal of permission crosses the barrier of regulatory
measures and comes in the region of interference with the administration of the institution, a right
which is guaranteed to the minority under Article 30(1). The Court restricted the operation of the
rule and made it inapplicable to the minority educational institution. In Director of School
Education, Government of T.N. v. Rev. Brother G. Arogiasamy, AIR 1971 Mad 440, the Madras High
Court had an occasion to consider the validity of an uniform procedure prescribed by the State
Government for admission of candidates to the aided training schools. The government directed
that the candidates should be selected by the school authorities by interviewing every candidate
eligible for admission and assessing and awarding marks in the interview. The marks awarded to
each candidate in the interview will be added to the marks secured by the candidate in the SSLC
public examination. On the basis of the aggregate of marks in the SSLC examination and those
obtained at the interview the selection was to be made without any further discretion. The High
Court held that the method of selection placed serious restrictions on the freedom of the minority
institution to admit their own students. It was found that the students of the minority community
could not compete with the students belonging to other communities.
The applications of students from other communities could not be restricted under law. The result
was that the students of minority community for whose benefit the institution was founded, had
little chance of getting admission. The High Court held that the government order prescribing the
uniform method of selection could not be applied to minority institutions.
78. Having set the scene, we can deal with the provisions of Articles 29(1) and 30(1) relatively
quickly. Under Article 29(1) every section of the citizens having a distinct language, script or culture
of its own has the right to conserve the same. Under Article 29(1), the minorities — religious or
linguistic — are entitled to establish and administer educational institutions to conserve their
distinct language, script or culture. However, it has been consistently held by the courts that the
right to establish an educational institution is not confined to purposes of conservation of language,
script or culture. The rights in Article 30(1) are of wider amplitude. The width of Article 30(1)
cannot be cut down by the considerations on which Article 29(1) is based. The words “of their
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
23

choice” in Article 30(1) leave vast options to the minorities in selecting the type of educational
institutions which they wish to establish. They can establish institutions to conserve their distinct
language, script or culture or for imparting general secular education or for both the purposes. (See:
Father W. Proost v. State of Bihar, (1969) 2 SCR 73, Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College v. State of
Gujarat, (1974) 1 SCC 717; and Kerala Education Bill case, 1959 SCR 995.)” (emphasis supplied) The
decision in St. Stephen's College (supra) has been analysed by my esteemed brother Lalit, J. in Sk.
Md. Rafique v. Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Ors., 2020 (1) SCALE
345, thus:
“28. In St. Stephen's College vs. University of Delhi, (1992) 1 SCC 558 a Bench of five
Judges of this Court had an occasion to consider the admission process adopted by
two aided minority institutions viz. St. Stephen's College at Delhi and Allahabad
Agricultural Institute at Naini. The factual context as summed−up in the majority
judgment authored by Shetty, J., was as under:
“68. It is not in dispute that St. Stephen's College and Allahabad Agricultural
Institute are receiving grant−in−aid from the government. St. Stephen's College gives
preference to Christian students. The Allahabad Agricultural Institute reserves 50 per
cent of the seats for Christian students. The Christian students admitted by
preference or against the quota reserved are having less merit in the qualifying
examination than the other candidates. The other candidates with more merit are
denied admission on the ground that they are not Christians.
69. It was argued for the University and the Students Union that since both the
institutions are receiving State aid, the institutional preference for admission based
on religion is violative of Article 29(2) of the Constitution. The institutions shall not
prefer or deny admission to candidates on ground of religion. For institutions, on the
other hand, it was claimed that any preference given to the religious minority
candidates in their own institutions cannot be a discrimination falling under Article
29(2). The institutions are established for the benefit of their community and if they
are prevented from admitting their community candidates, the purpose of
establishing the institutions would be defeated. The minorities are entitled to admit
their candidates by preference or by reservation. They are also entitled to admit them
to the exclusion of all others and that right flows from the right to establish and
administer educational institutions guaranteed under Article 30(1).” 28.1. The
majority judgment dealt with the submissions raised by the institution as under:
“80. Equally, it would be difficult to accept the second submission that the minorities
are entitled to establish and administer educational institutions for their exclusive
benefit. The choice of institution provided in Article 30(1) does not mean that the
minorities could establish educational institution for the benefit of their own
community people. Indeed, they cannot. It was pointed out in Re, Kerala Education
Bill that the minorities cannot establish educational institution only for the benefit of
their community. If such was the aim, Article 30(1) would have been differently
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
24

worded and it would have contained the words "for their own community". In the
absence of such words it is legally impermissible to construe the article as conferring
the right on the minorities to establish educational institution for their own benefit.
81. Even in practice, such claims are likely to be met with considerable hostility. It
may not be conducive to have a relatively homogeneous society. It may lead to
religious bigotry which is the bane of mankind. In the nation building with secular
character sectarian schools or colleges, segregated faculties or universities for
imparting general secular education are undesirable and they may undermine secular
democracy. They would be inconsistent with the central concept of secularism and
equality embedded in the Constitution. Every educational institution irrespective of
community to which it belongs is a 'melting pot' in our national life. The students and
teachers are the critical ingredients. It is there they develop respect for, and tolerance
of, the cultures and beliefs of others. It is essential therefore, that there should be
proper mix of students of different communities in all educational institutions.” ***
28.3. The majority Judgment, then, considered the matter from the perspective of
"Rights of Minorities and Balancing Interest" and observed:
“101. Laws carving out the rights of minorities in Article 30(1) however, must not be
arbitrary, invidious or unjustified; they must have a reasonable relation between the
aim and the means employed. The individual rights will necessarily have to be
balanced with competing minority interests. In Sidhajbhai case (1963) 3 SCR 837 the
government order directing the minority run college to reserve 80 per cent of seats
for government nominees and permitting only 20 per cent of seats for the
management with a threat to withhold the grant−in−aid and recognition was struck
down by the Court as infringing the fundamental freedom guaranteed by Article
30(1). Attention may also be drawn to Article 337 of the Constitution which provided
a special concession to Anglo− Indian community for ten years from the
commencement of the Constitution. Unlike Article 30(2) it conferred a positive right
on the Anglo−Indian community to get grants from the government for their
educational institutions, but subject to the condition that at least 40 per cent of
annual admission were made available to members of other communities.
102. In the light of all these principles and factors, and in view of the importance
which the Constitution attaches to protective measures to minorities under Article
30(1), the minority aided educational institutions are entitled to prefer their
community candidates to maintain the minority character of the institutions subject
of course to conformity with the University standard. The State may regulate the
intake in this category with due regard to the need of the community in the area
which the institution is intended to serve. But in no case such intake shall exceed 50
per cent of the annual admission. The minority institutions shall make available at
least 50 per cent of the annual admission to members of communities other than the
minority community. The admission of other community candidates shall be done
purely on the basis of merit.” 28.4. It was also observed that regulations which serve
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
25

the interest of students and teachers and preserve the uniformity in standards of
education amongst the affiliated institutions could validly be made. The relevant
discussion in para 59 was as under:
“59. The need for a detailed study on this aspect is indeed not necessary. The right to
minorities whether religious or linguistic, to administer educational institutions and
the power of the State to regulate academic matters and management is now fairly
well settled. The right to administer does not include the right to maladminister. The
State being the controlling authority has right and duty to regulate all academic
matters. Regulations which will serve the interests of students and teachers, and to
preserve the uniformity in standards of education among the affiliated institutions
could be made. The minority institutions cannot claim immunity against such general
pattern and standard or against general laws such as laws relating to law and order,
health, hygiene, labour relations, social welfare legislations, contracts, torts etc.
which are applicable to all communities. So long as the basic right of minorities to
manage educational institution is not taken away, the State is competent to make
regulatory legislation. Regulations, however, shall not have the effect of depriving the
right of minorities to educate their children in their own institution. That is a
privilege which is implied in the right conferred by Article 30(1).” 28.5. The
dissenting opinion of Kasliwal, J. quoted a passage from the Constituent Assembly
Debates (CAD) touching upon the matter in issue as under:− “137. These were
Articles 23(1) on the one hand and 23(3)(a) and 23(3)(b) on the other hand in the
Draft Constitution.
   Firstly,    Dr.    B.R.     Ambedkar      said     in   relation
   to draft Article 23(2) corresponding      to     the    present
Article 28 of the Constitution that even in relation to Articles 30 and 29 the State was
completely free to give or not to give aid to the educational institutions of the
religious or linguistic minorities. He said:
“Now, with regard to the second clause I think it has not been sufficiently well
understood. We have tried to reconcile the claim of a community which has started
educational institutions for the advancement of its own children either in education
or in cultural matters, to permit to give religious instruction in such institutions;
notwithstanding the fact that it receives certain aid from the State. The State, of
course, is free to give aid, is free not to give aid; the only limitation we have placed is
this, that the State shall not debar the institution from claiming aid under its grant−
in−aid code merely on the ground that it is run and maintained by a community and
not maintained by a public body. We have there provided also a further qualification,
that while it is free to give religious instruction in the institution and the grant made
by the State shall not be a bar to the giving of such instruction, it shall not give
instruction to, or make it compulsory upon, the children belonging to other
communities unless and until they obtain the consent of the parents of these
children. That, I think, is a salutary provision. It performs two functions...
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
26

Shri H.V. Kamath: On a point of clarification what about institutions and schools run
by a community or a minority for its own pupils — not a school where all
communities are mixed but a school run by the community for its own pupils?
The Hon'ble Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: If my friend, Mr. Kamath will read the other article
he will see that once an institution, whether maintained by the community or not,
gets a grant, the condition is that it shall keep the school open to all communities.
That provision he has not read.”
138. He reaffirmed the freedom of the State to give or not to give aid to these schools
when directly referring to draft Article 23 which is the precursor of the present
Articles 29 and 30 as follows (VII CAD 923):
“I think another thing which has to be borne in reading Article 23 is that it does not
impose any obligation or burden upon the State. It does not say that, when for
instance the Madras people come to Bombay, the Bombay Government shall be
required by law to finance any project of giving education either in Tamil language or
in Andhra language or any other language. There is no burden cast upon the State.
The only limitation that is imposed by Article 23 is that if there is a cultural minority
which wants to preserve its language, its script and its culture, the State shall not by
law impose upon it any other culture which may be either local or otherwise.” And,
went on to observe that once an institution was receiving aid, "it must abide by the
rigor of Article 29(2) in the matter of admission of students in the college" and "as
already held by me, St. Stephen's College and Allahabad Agricultural Institute are not
entitled to claim any preferential right or reservation in favour of students of
Christian community as they are getting grant−in−aid and as such I do not consider it
necessary to labour any more on the question of deciding as to what percentage can
be considered as reasonable.” (emphasis supplied) The Court held that the choice of
institution does not mean that the minorities could establish educational institution
for the benefit of their own community people. In Re The Kerala Education Bill
(supra), it was considered and observed that the minorities cannot establish
educational institution only for the benefit of their community. Every educational
institution, irrespective of community to which it belongs, is a 'melting pot' in our
national life and that there should be mixing up of students of different communities
in all educational institutions.
The intake for the community cannot exceed 50% of the annual admission, which is
to be provided to other than the minority community. The admission should be made
purely on the basis of merit.
27. In T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), decided by Bench of 11 Judges of the Court, on
consideration of the rights under Article 30 of the Constitution of India, held thus:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
27

“3. The hearing of these cases has had a chequered history. Writ Petition No. 350 of
1993 filed by the Islamic Academy of Education and connected petitions were placed
before a Bench of five Judges. As the Bench was prima facie of the opinion that
Article 30 did not clothe a minority educational institution with the power to adopt
its own method of selection and the correctness of the decision of this Court in St.
Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, (1992) 1 SCC 558, was doubted, it was
directed that the questions that arose should be authoritatively answered by a larger
Bench. These cases were then placed before a Bench of seven Judges. The questions
framed were recast and on 6−2−1997, the Court directed that the matter be placed
before a Bench of at least eleven Judges, as it was felt that in view of the Forty−
second Amendment to the Constitution, whereby "education" had been included in
Entry 25 of List III of Seventh Schedule, the question of who would be regarded as a
"minority" was required to be considered because the earlier case−law related to the
pre− amendment era, when education was only in the State List. When the cases
came up for hearing before an eleven−Judge Bench, during the course of hearing on
19−3−1997, the following order was passed:
“Since a doubt has arisen during the course of our arguments as to whether this
Bench would feel itself bound by the ratio propounded in — Kerala Education Bill,
1957, In Re, AIR 1958 SC 956 and Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society v. State of
Gujarat, (1974) 1 SCC 717 it is clarified that this sized Bench would not feel itself
inhibited by the views expressed in those cases since the present endeavour is to
discern the true scope and interpretation of Article 30(1) of the Constitution, which
being the dominant question would require examination in its pristine purity. The
factum is recorded.””
38. The scheme in Unni Krishnan case, (1993) 1 SCC 645 has the effect of
nationalizing education in respect of important features viz. the right of a private
unaided institution to give admission and to fix the fee. By framing this scheme,
which has led to the State Governments legislating in conformity with the scheme,
the private institutions are indistinguishable from the government institutions;
curtailing all the essential features of the right of administration of a private unaided
educational institution can neither be called fair nor reasonable. Even in the decision
in Unni Krishnan case it has been observed by Jeevan Reddy, J., at p. 749, para 194,
as follows:
“194. The hard reality that emerges is that private educational institutions are a
necessity in the present−day context. It is not possible to do without them because
the governments are in no position to meet the demand — particularly in the sector of
medical and technical education which call for substantial outlays. While education is
one of the most important functions of the Indian State it has no monopoly therein.
Private educational institutions — including minority educational institutions — too
have a role to play.”
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
28

40. Any system of student selection would be unreasonable if it deprives the private
unaided institution of the right of rational selection, which it devised for itself,
subject to the minimum qualification that may be prescribed and to some system of
computing the equivalence between different kinds of qualifications, like a common
entrance test. Such a system of selection can involve both written and oral tests for
selection, based on principle of fairness.
45. In view of the discussion hereinabove, we hold that the decision in Unni Krishnan
case, (1993) 1 SCC 645 insofar as it framed the scheme relating to the grant of
admission and the fixing of the fee, was not correct, and to that extent, the said
decision and the consequent directions given to UGC, AICTE, the Medical Council of
India, the Central and State Governments etc. are overruled.
50. The right to establish and administer broadly comprises the following rights:
(a) to admit students;
(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure;
(c) to constitute a governing body;
(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non−teaching); and
(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any employees.
53. With regard to the core components of the rights under Articles 19 and 26(a), it must be held
that while the State has the right to prescribe qualifications necessary for admission, private
unaided colleges have the right to admit students of their choice, subject to an objective and rational
procedure of selection and the compliance with conditions, if any, requiring admission of a small
percentage of students belonging to weaker sections of the society by granting them freeships or
scholarships, if not granted by the Government. Furthermore, in setting up a reasonable fee
structure, the element of profiteering is not as yet accepted in Indian conditions. The fee structure
must take into consideration the need to generate funds to be utilized for the betterment and growth
of the educational institution, the betterment of education in that institution and to provide facilities
necessary for the benefit of the students. In any event, a private institution will have the right to
constitute its own governing body, for which qualifications may be prescribed by the State or the
university concerned. It will, however, be objectionable if the State retains the power to nominate
specific individuals on governing bodies. Nomination by the State, which could be on a political
basis, will be an inhibiting factor for private enterprise to embark upon the occupation of
establishing and administering educational institutions. For the same reasons, nomination of
teachers either directly by the department or through a service commission will be an unreasonable
inroad and an unreasonable restriction on the autonomy of the private unaided educational
institution.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
29

68. It would be unfair to apply the same rules and regulations regulating admission to both aided
and unaided professional institutions. It must be borne in mind that unaided professional
institutions are entitled to autonomy in their administration while, at the same time, they do not
forego or discard the principle of merit. It would, therefore, be permissible for the university or the
Government, at the time of granting recognition, to require a private unaided institution to provide
for merit−based selection while, at the same time, giving the management sufficient discretion in
admitting students. This can be done through various methods. For instance, a certain percentage of
the seats can be reserved for admission by the management out of those students who have passed
the common entrance test held by itself or by the State/university and have applied to the college
concerned for admission, while the rest of the seats may be filled up on the basis of counselling by
the State agency. This will incidentally take care of poorer and backward sections of the society. The
prescription of percentage for this purpose has to be done by the Government according to the local
needs and different percentages can be fixed for minority unaided and non− minority unaided and
professional colleges. The same principles may be applied to other non−professional but unaided
educational institutions viz. graduation and postgraduation non−professional colleges or institutes.
71. While giving aid to professional institutions, it would be permissible for the authority giving aid
to prescribe by rules or regulations, the conditions on the basis of which admission will be granted
to different aided colleges by virtue of merit, coupled with the reservation policy of the State. The
merit may be determined either through a common entrance test conducted by the university or the
Government followed by counselling, or on the basis of an entrance test conducted by individual
institutions — the method to be followed is for the university or the Government to decide. The
authority may also devise other means to ensure that admission is granted to an aided professional
institution on the basis of merit. In the case of such institutions, it will be permissible for the
Government or the university to provide that consideration should be shown to the weaker sections
of the society.
90. In the exercise of this right to conserve the language, script or culture, that section of the society
can set up educational institutions. The right to establish and maintain educational institutions of its
choice is a necessary concomitant to the right conferred by Article 30. The right under Article 30 is
not absolute. Article 29(2) provides that, where any educational institution is maintained by the
State or receives aid out of State funds, no citizen shall be denied admission on the grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them. The use of the expression "any educational institution"
in Article 29(2) would (sic not) refer to any educational institution established by anyone, but which
is maintained by the State or receives aid out of State funds. In other words, on a plain reading,
State−maintained or aided educational institutions, whether established by the Government or the
majority or a minority community cannot deny admission to a citizen on the grounds only of
religion, race, caste or language.
93. Can Article 30(1) be so read as to mean that it contains an absolute right of the minorities,
whether based on religion or language, to establish and administer educational institutions in any
manner they desire, and without being obliged to comply with the provisions of any law? Does
Article 30(1) give the religious or linguistic minorities a right to establish an educational institution
that propagates religious or racial bigotry or ill will amongst the people? Can the right under Article
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
30

30(1) be so exercised that it is opposed to public morality or health? In the exercise of its right,
would the minority while establishing educational institutions not be bound by town planning rules
and regulations? Can they construct and maintain buildings in any manner they desire without
complying with the provisions of the building bye−laws or health regulations?
105. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of Bombay, (1963) 3 SCR 837, this Court had to consider the
validity of an order issued by the Government of Bombay whereby from the academic year 1955−56,
80% of the seats in the training colleges for teachers in non−government training colleges were to be
reserved for the teachers nominated by the Government. The petitioners, who belonged to the
minority community, were, inter alia, running a training college for teachers, as also primary
schools. The said primary schools and college were conducted for the benefit of the religious
denomination of the United Church of Northern India and Indian Christians generally, though
admission was not denied to students belonging to other communities. The petitioners challenged
the government order requiring 80% of the seats to be filled by nominees of the Government, inter
alia, on the ground that the petitioners were members of a religious denomination and that they
constituted a religious minority, and that the educational institutions had been established
primarily for the benefit of the Christian community. It was the case of the petitioners that the
decision of the Government violated their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 30(1), 26(a),
(b), (c) and (d), and 19(1)(f) and (g). While interpreting Article 30, it was observed by this Court at
SCR pp. 849−50 as under:
“All minorities, linguistic or religious have by Article 30(1) an absolute right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice; and any law or
executive direction which seeks to infringe the substance of that right under Article
30(1) would to that extent be void. This, however, is not to say that it is not open to
the State to impose regulations upon the exercise of this right. The fundamental
freedom is to establish and to administer educational institutions: it is a right to
establish and administer what are in truth educational institutions, institutions which
cater to the educational needs of the citizens, or sections thereof. Regulation made in
the true interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality,
public order and the like may undoubtedly be imposed. Such Regulations are not
restrictions on the substance of the right which is guaranteed: they secure the proper
functioning of the institution, in matters educational.”
106. While coming to the conclusion that the right of the private training colleges to admit students
of their choice was severely restricted, this Court referred to the opinion in Kerala Education Bill,
1957 case, 1959 SCR 995, but distinguished it by observing that the Court did not, in that case, lay
down any test of reasonableness of the regulation. No general principle on which the reasonableness
of a regulation may be tested was sought to be laid down in Kerala Education Bill, 1957 case, 1959
SCR 995 and, therefore, it was held in Sidhajbhai Sabhai case, (1963) 3 SCR 837 that the opinion in
that case was not an authority for the proposition that all regulative measures, which were not
destructive or annihilative of the character of the institution established by the minority, provided
the regulations were in the national or public interest, were valid. In this connection it was further
held at SCR pp. 856− 57, as follows:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
31

“The right established by Article 30(1) is a fundamental right declared in terms absolute. Unlike the
fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Article 19, it is not subject to reasonable restrictions. It is
intended to be a real right for the protection of the minorities in the matter of setting up of
educational institutions of their own choice. The right is intended to be effective and is not to be
whittled down by so−called regulative measures conceived in the interest not of the minority
educational institution, but of the public or the nation as a whole. If every order which while
maintaining the formal character of a minority institution destroys the power of administration is
held justifiable because it is in the public or national interest, though not in its interest as an
educational institution, the right guaranteed by Article 30(1) will be but a 'teasing illusion', a
promise of unreality. Regulations which may lawfully be imposed either by legislative or executive
action as a condition of receiving grant or of recognition must be directed to making the institution
while retaining its character as a minority institution effective as an educational institution. Such
regulation must satisfy a dual test −− the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of
the educational character of the institution and is conducive to making the institution an effective
vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it.”
107. The aforesaid decision does indicate that the right under Article 30(1) is not so absolute as to
prevent the Government from making any regulation whatsoever. As already noted hereinabove, in
Sidhajbhai Sabhai case, (1963) 3 SCR 837, it was laid down that regulations made in the true
interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality and public order could
be imposed. If this is so, it is difficult to appreciate how the Government can be prevented from
framing regulations that are in the national interest, as it seems to be indicated in the passage
quoted hereinabove. Any regulation framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to all
educational institutions, whether run by the majority or the minority. Such a limitation must
necessarily be read into Article 30. The right under Article 30(1) cannot be such as to override the
national interest or to prevent the Government from framing regulations in that behalf. It is, of
course, true that government regulations cannot destroy the minority character of the institution or
make the right to establish and administer a mere illusion; but the right under Article 30 is not so
absolute as to be above the law. It will further be seen that in Sidhajbhai Sabhai case, (1963) 3 SCR
837, no reference was made to Article 29(2) of the Constitution. This decision, therefore, cannot be
an authority for the proposition canvassed before us.
119. In a concurrent judgment, while noting (at SCC p. 770, para 73) that "clause (2) of Article 29
forbids the denial of admission to citizens into any educational institution maintained by the State
or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them",
Khanna, J. then examined Article 30, and observed at SCR p. 222, as follows: (SCC p. 770, para 74)
“74. Clause (1) of Article 30 gives right to all minorities, whether based on religion or language, to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Analysing that clause it would
follow that the right which has been conferred by the clause is on two types of minorities. Those
minorities may be based either on religion or on language. The right conferred upon the said
minorities is to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The word 'establish'
indicates the right to bring into existence, while the right to administer an institution means the
right to effectively manage and conduct the affairs of the institution. Administration connotes
management of the affairs of the institution. The management must be free of control so that the
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
32

founders or their nominees can mould the institution as they think fit and in accordance with their
ideas of how the interest of the community in general and the institution in particular will be best
served. The words 'of their choice' qualify the educational institutions and show that the educational
institutions established and administered by the minorities need not be of some particular class; the
minorities have the right and freedom to establish and administer such educational institutions as
they choose. Clause (2) of Article 30 prevents the State from making discrimination in the matter of
grant of aid to any educational institution on the ground that the institution is under the
management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.”
120. Explaining the rationale behind Article 30, it was observed at SCR p. 224, as follows: (SCC p.
772, para 77) “77. The idea of giving some special rights to the minorities is not to have a kind of a
privileged or pampered section of the population but to give to the minorities a sense of security and
a feeling of confidence. The great leaders of India since time immemorial had preached the doctrine
of tolerance and catholicity of outlook. Those noble ideas were enshrined in the Constitution.
Special rights for minorities were designed not to create inequality. Their real effect was to bring
about equality by ensuring the preservation of the minority institutions and by guaranteeing to the
minorities autonomy in the matter of the administration of those institutions. The differential
treatment for the minorities by giving them special rights is intended to bring about an equilibrium,
so that the ideal of equality may not be reduced to a mere abstract idea but should become a living
reality and result in true, genuine equality, an equality not merely in theory but also in fact.”
121. While advocating that provisions of the Constitution should be construed according to the
liberal, generous and sympathetic approach, and after considering the principles which could be
discerned by him from the earlier decisions of this Court, Khanna, J., observed at SCR p. 234, as
follows: (SCC p. 781, para 89) “The minorities are as much children of the soil as the majority and
the approach has been to ensure that nothing should be done as might deprive the minorities of a
sense of belonging, of a feeling of security, of a consciousness of equality and of the awareness that
the conservation of their religion, culture, language and script as also the protection of their
educational institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the Constitution. The same generous,
liberal and sympathetic approach should weigh with the courts in construing Articles 29 and 30 as
marked the deliberations of the Constitution−makers in drafting those articles and making them
part of the fundamental rights. The safeguarding of the interest of the minorities amongst sections
of population is as important as the protection of the interest amongst individuals of persons who
are below the age of majority or are otherwise suffering from some kind of infirmity. The
Constitution and the laws made by civilized nations, therefore, generally contain provisions for the
protection of those interests. It can, indeed, be said to be an index of the level of civilization and
catholicity of a nation as to how far their minorities feel secure and are not subject to any
discrimination or suppression.”
122. The learned Judge then observed that the right of the minorities to administer educational
institutions did not prevent the making of reasonable regulations in respect of these institutions.
Recognizing that the right to administer educational institutions could not include the right to
maladminister, it was held that regulations could be lawfully imposed, for the receiving of grants
and recognition, while permitting the institution to retain its character as a minority institution. The
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
33

regulation "must satisfy a dual test — the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of
the educational character of the institution and is conducive to making the institution an effective
vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it". (SCC p. 783,
para 92) It was permissible for the authorities to prescribe regulations, which must be complied
with, before a minority institution could seek or retain affiliation and recognition. But it was also
stated that the regulations made by the authority should not impinge upon the minority character of
the institution. Therefore, a balance has to be kept between the two objectives — that of ensuring the
standard of excellence of the institution, and that of preserving the right of the minorities to
establish and administer their educational institutions. Regulations that embraced and reconciled
the two objectives could be considered to be reasonable. This, in our view, is the correct approach to
the problem.
123. After referring to the earlier cases in relation to the appointment of teachers, it was noted by
Khanna, J., that the conclusion which followed was that a law which interfered with a minority's
choice of qualified teachers, or its disciplinary control over teachers and other members of the staff
of the institution, was void, as it was violative of Article 30(1). While it was permissible for the State
and its educational authorities to prescribe the qualifications of teachers, it was held that once the
teachers possessing the requisite qualifications were selected by the minorities for their educational
institutions, the State would have no right to veto the selection of those teachers.
The selection and appointment of teachers for an educational institution was regarded as one of the
essential ingredients under Article 30(1). The Court's attention was drawn to the fact that in Kerala
Education Bill, 1957 case, 1959 SCR 995, this Court had opined that clauses 11 and 12 made it
obligatory for all aided schools to select teachers from a panel selected from each district by the
Public Service Commission and that no teacher of an aided school could be dismissed, removed or
reduced in rank without the previous sanction of the authorized officer. At SCR p.245, Khanna, J.,
observed that in cases subsequent to the opinion in Kerala Education Bill, 1957 case, (1959) SCR 995
this Court had held similar provisions as clause 11 and clause 12 to be violative of Article 30(1) of the
minority institutions. He then observed as follows: (SCC p. 792, para
109).
“The opinion expressed by this Court in Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957, 1959 SCR 995, was of an
advisory character and though great weight should be attached to it because of its persuasive value,
the said opinion cannot override the opinion subsequently expressed by this Court in contested
cases. It is the law declared by this Court in the subsequent contested cases which would have a
binding effect. The words 'as at present advised' as well as the preceding sentence indicate that the
view expressed by this Court in Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957 in this respect was hesitant and
tentative and not a final view in the matter.”
135. We agree with the contention of the learned Solicitor− General that the Constitution in Part III
does not contain or give any absolute right. All rights conferred in Part III of the Constitution are
subject to at least other provisions of the said Part. It is difficult to comprehend that the framers of
the Constitution would have given such an absolute right to the religious or linguistic minorities,
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
34

which would enable them to establish and administer educational institutions in a manner so as to
be in conflict with the other Parts of the Constitution. We find it difficult to accept that in the
establishment and administration of educational institutions by the religious and linguistic
minorities, no law of the land, even the Constitution, is to apply to them.
136. Decisions of this Court have held that the right to administer does not include the right to
maladminister. It has also been held that the right to administer is not absolute, but must be subject
to reasonable regulations for the benefit of the institutions as the vehicle of education, consistent
with national interest. General laws of the land applicable to all persons have been held to be
applicable to the minority institutions also — for example, laws relating to taxation, sanitation,
social welfare, economic regulation, public order and morality.
137. It follows from the aforesaid decisions that even though the words of Article 30(1) are
unqualified, this Court has held that at least certain other laws of the land pertaining to health,
morality and standards of education apply. The right under Article 30(1) has, therefore, not been
held to be absolute or above other provisions of the law, and we reiterate the same. By the same
analogy, there is no reason why regulations or conditions concerning, generally, the welfare of
students and teachers should not be made applicable in order to provide a proper academic
atmosphere, as such provisions do not in any way interfere with the right of administration or
management under Article 30(1).
138. As we look at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of guarantee or assurance to the linguistic and religious
minority institutions of their right to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice. Secularism and equality being two of the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1)
ensures protection to the linguistic and religious minorities, thereby preserving the secularism of the
country. Furthermore, the principles of equality must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of such
rights. No law can be framed that will discriminate against such minorities with regard to the
establishment and administration of educational institutions vis−a−vis other educational
institutions. Any law or rule or regulation that would put the educational institutions run by the
minorities at a disadvantage when compared to the institutions run by the others will have to be
struck down. At the same time, there also cannot be any reverse discrimination. It was observed in
St. Xavier's College case, (1975) 1 SCR 173 at SCR p. 192 that: (SCC p. 743, para 9) “The whole object
of conferring the right on minorities under Article 30 is to ensure that there will be equality between
the majority and the minority. If the minorities do not have such special protection they will be
denied equality.” In other words, the essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment between
the majority and the minority institutions. No one type or category of institution should be
disfavoured or, for that matter, receive more favourable treatment than another. Laws of the land,
including rules and regulations, must apply equally to the majority institutions as well as to the
minority institutions. The minority institutions must be allowed to do what the non−minority
institutions are permitted to do.
139. Like any other private unaided institutions, similar unaided educational institutions
administered by linguistic or religious minorities are assured maximum autonomy in relation
thereto; e.g. method of recruitment of teachers, charging of fees and admission of students. They
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
35

will have to comply with the conditions of recognition, which cannot be such as to whittle down the
right under Article 30.
144. It cannot be argued that no conditions can be imposed while giving aid to a minority
institution. Whether it is an institution run by the majority or the minority, all conditions that have
relevance to the proper utilization of the grant−in−aid by an educational institution can be imposed.
All that Article 30(2) states is that on the ground that an institution is under the management of a
minority, whether based on religion or language, grant of aid to that educational institution cannot
be discriminated against, if other educational institutions are entitled to receive aid. The conditions
for grant or non−grant of aid to educational institutions have to be uniformly applied, whether it is a
majority−run institution or a minority−run institution. As in the case of a majority−run institution,
the moment a minority institution obtains a grant of aid, Article 28 of the Constitution comes into
play. When an educational institution is maintained out of State funds, no religious instruction can
be provided therein. Article 28(1) does not state that it applies only to educational institutions that
are not established or maintained by religious or linguistic minorities. Furthermore, upon the
receipt of aid, the provisions of Article 28(3) would apply to all educational institutions whether run
by the minorities or the non− minorities. Article 28(3) is the right of a person studying in a State−
recognized institution or in an educational institution receiving aid from State funds, not to take
part in any religious instruction, if imparted by such institution, without his/her consent (or his/her
guardian's consent if such a person is a minor). Just as Articles 28(1) and (3) become applicable the
moment any educational institution takes aid, likewise, Article 29(2) would also be attracted and
become applicable to an educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State
funds. It was strenuously contended that the right to give admission is one of the essential
ingredients of the right to administer conferred on the religious or linguistic minority, and that this
right should not be curtailed in any manner. It is difficult to accept this contention. If Articles 28(1)
and (3) apply to a minority institution that receives aid out of State funds, there is nothing in the
language of Article 30 that would make the provisions of Article 29(2) inapplicable. Like Article
28(1) and Article 28(3), Article 29(2) refers to "any educational institution maintained by the State
or receiving aid out of State funds". A minority institution would fall within the ambit of Article
29(2) in the same manner in which Article 28(1) and Article 28(3) would be applicable to an aided
minority institution. It is true that one of the rights to administer an educational institution is to
grant admission to the students. As long as an educational institution, whether belonging to the
minority or the majority community, does not receive aid, it would, in our opinion, be its right and
discretion to grant admission to such students as it chooses or selects subject to what has been
clarified before. Out of the various rights that the minority institution has in the administration of
the institution, Article 29(2) curtails the right to grant admission to a certain extent. By virtue of
Article 29(2), no citizen can be denied admission by an aided minority institution on the grounds
only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. It is no doubt true that Article 29(2) does
curtail one of the powers of the minority institution, but on receiving aid, some of the rights that an
unaided minority institution has, are also curtailed by Articles 28(1) and 28(3). A minority
educational institution has a right to impart religious instruction — this right is taken away by
Article 28(1), if that minority institution is maintained wholly out of State funds. Similarly on
receiving aid out of State funds or on being recognized by the State, the absolute right of a minority
institution requiring a student to attend religious instruction is curtailed by Article 28(3). If the
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
36

curtailment of the right to administer a minority institution on receiving aid or being wholly
maintained out of State funds as provided by Article 28 is valid, there is no reason why Article 29(2)
should not be held to be applicable. There is nothing in the language of Articles 28(1) and (3), Article
29(2) and Article 30 to suggest that, on receiving aid, Articles 28(1) and (3) will apply, but Article
29(2) will not. Therefore, the contention that the institutions covered by Article 30 are outside the
injunction of Article 29(2) cannot be accepted.
151. The right of the aided minority institution to preferably admit students of its community, when
Article 29(2) was applicable, has been clarified by this Court over a decade ago in St. Stephen's
College case, (1992) 1 SCC 558. While upholding the procedure for admitting students, this Court
also held that aided minority educational institutions were entitled to preferably admit their
community candidates so as to maintain the minority character of the institution, and that the State
may regulate the intake in this category with due regard to the area that the institution was intended
to serve, but that this intake should not be more than 50% in any case. Thus, St. Stephen's
endeavoured to strike a balance between the two articles. Though we accept the ratio of St. Stephen's
which has held the field for over a decade, we have compelling reservations in accepting the rigid
percentage stipulated therein. As Article 29 and Article 30 apply not only to institutions of higher
education but also to schools, a ceiling of 50% would not be proper. It will be more appropriate that,
depending upon the level of the institution, whether it be a primary or secondary or high school or a
college, professional or otherwise, and on the population and educational needs of the area in which
the institution is to be located, the State properly balances the interests of all by providing for such a
percentage of students of the minority community to be admitted, so as to adequately serve the
interest of the community for which the institution was established.
152. At the same time, the admissions to aided institutions, whether awarded to minority or non−
minority students, cannot be at the absolute sweet will and pleasure of the management of minority
educational institutions. As the regulations to promote academic excellence and standards do not
encroach upon the guaranteed rights Under Article 30, the aided minority educational institutions
can be required to observe inter se merit amongst the eligible minority applicants and passage of
common entrance test by the candidates, where there is one, with regard to admissions in
professional and non−professional colleges. If there is no such test, a rational method of assessing
comparative merit has to be evolved. As regards the non− minority segment, admission may be on
the basis of the common entrance test and counselling by a State agency. In the courses for which
such a test and counselling are not in vogue, admission can be on the basis of relevant criteria for
the determination of merit. It would be open to the State authorities to insist on allocating a certain
percentage of seats to those belonging to weaker sections of society, from amongst the non−minority
seats.
Answers to eleven questions Q. 1. *** A. *** Q. 2. *** A. *** Q. 3. (a) *** A. *** Q. 3. (b) To what
extent can professional education be treated as a matter coming under minorities’ rights under
Article 30?
A. Article 30(1) gives religious and linguistic minorities the right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice. The use of the words “of their choice” indicates that even
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
37

professional educational institutions would be covered by Article 30.
Q. 4. Whether the admission of students to minority educational institution, whether aided or
unaided, can be regulated by the State Government or by the university to which the institution is
affiliated?
A. Admission of students to unaided minority educational institutions viz. schools and
undergraduate colleges where the scope for merit−based selection is practically nil, cannot be
regulated by the State or university concerned, except for providing the qualifications and minimum
conditions of eligibility in the interest of academic standards. The right to admit students being an
essential facet of the right to administer educational institutions of their choice, as contemplated
under Article 30 of the Constitution, the State Government or the university may not be entitled to
interfere with that right, so long as the admission to the unaided educational institutions is on a
transparent basis and the merit is adequately taken care of. The right to administer, not being
absolute, there could be regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards and maintaining
excellence thereof, and it is more so in the matter of admissions to professional institutions. … Q.5.
(a) Whether the minorities’s rights to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice will include the procedure and method of admission and selection of students?
A. A minority institution may have its own procedure and method of admission as well as selection
of students, but such a procedure must be fair and transparent, and the selection of students in
professional and higher education colleges should be on the basis of merit. The procedure adopted
or selection made should not be tantamount to maladministration. Even an unaided minority
institution ought not to ignore the merit of the students for admission, while exercising its right to
admit students to the colleges aforesaid, as in that event, the institution will fail to achieve
excellence.
Q.5.(b) *** A. *** Q.5. (c) Whether the statutory provisions which regulate the facets of
administration like control over educational agencies, control over governing bodies, conditions of
affiliation including recognition/withdrawal thereof, and appointment of staff, employees, teachers
and principals including their service conditions and regulation of fees, etc. would interfere with the
right of administration of minorities?
A. So far as the statutory provisions regulating the facets of administration are concerned, in case of
an unaided minority educational institution, the regulatory measure of control should be minimal
and the conditions of recognition as well as the conditions of affiliation to a university or board have
to be complied with, but in the matter of day−to−day management, like the appointment of staff,
teaching and non−teaching, and administrative control over them, the management should have the
freedom and there should not be any external controlling agency. However, a rational procedure for
the selection of teaching staff and for taking disciplinary action has to be evolved by the
management itself.
For redressing the grievances of employees of aided and unaided institutions who are subjected to
punishment or termination from service, a mechanism will have to be evolved, and in our opinion,
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
38

appropriate tribunals could be constituted, and till then, such tribunals could be presided over by a
judicial officer of the rank of District Judge.
The State or other controlling authorities, however, can always prescribe the minimum
qualification, experience and other conditions bearing on the merit of an individual for being
appointed as a teacher or a principal of any educational institution.
Regulations can be framed governing service conditions for teaching and other staff for whom aid is
provided by the State, without interfering with the overall administrative control of the management
over the staff.
Fees to be charged by unaided institutions cannot be regulated but no institution should charge
capitation fee.” (emphasis supplied) In T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), the Court held that some
system of computing equivalence between different kinds of qualifications like a common entrance
test, would not be in violation of the rights conferred. The unaided minority institutions under
Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India have the right to admit students, but the merit may be
determined by common entrance test and the rights under Article 30(1) is not absolute so as to
prevent the Government from making any regulations. The Government cannot be prevented from
framing regulations that are in national interest. However, the safeguard is that the Government
cannot discriminate any minority institution and put them in a disadvantageous position vis−à−vis
to other educational institutions and has to maintain the concept of equality in real sense. The
minority institutions must be allowed to do what non−minority institutions are permitted. It is open
to State/concerned bodies to frame regulations with respect to affiliation and recognition, to provide
a proper academic atmosphere. While answering question no.4, it was held that the Government or
the University can lay down the regulatory measures ensuring educational standards and
maintaining excellence and more so, in the matter of admission to the professional institutions. It
may not interfere with the rights so long as the admissions to the unaided minority institutions are
on transparent basis and the merit is adequately taken care of.
28. In Brahmo Samaj Education Society v. State of West Bengal, (2004) 6 SCC 224, the Court
opined that State can impose such conditions as are necessary for the proper maintenance of
standards of education and to check maladministration. The decision of T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) was followed in which it was observed that the State could regulate the method of selection
and appointment of teachers after prescribing requisite qualifications for the same. In Brahmo
Samaj Education Society (supra), it was further opined that the State could very well provide the
basic qualification for teachers.
The equal standard of teachers has been maintained by the NET / SLET.
29. This Court in P.A. Inamdar (supra) also considered the difference between professional and
non−professional educational institutions, thus:
“104. Article 30(1) speaks of “educational institutions” generally and so does Article
29(2). These articles do not draw any distinction between an educational institution
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
39

dispensing theological education or professional or non−professional education.
However, the terrain of thought as has developed through successive judicial
pronouncements culminating in Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, is that looking at
the concept of education, in the backdrop of the constitutional provisions,
professional educational institutions constitute a class by themselves as distinguished
from educational institutions imparting non−professional education. It is not
necessary for us to go deep into this aspect of the issue posed before us inasmuch as
Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, has clarified that merit and excellence assume
special significance in the context of professional studies. Though merit and
excellence are not anathema to non−professional education, yet at that level and due
to the nature of education which is more general, the need for merit and excellence
therein is not of the degree as is called for in the context of professional education.
105. Dealing with unaided minority educational institutions, Pai Foundation, (2002)
8 SCC 481, holds that Article 30 does not come in the way of the State stepping in for
the purpose of securing transparency and recognition of merit in the matter of
admissions. Regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards and
maintaining excellence thereof are no anathema to the protection conferred by
Article 30(1). However, a distinction is to be drawn between unaided minority
educational institution of the level of schools and undergraduate colleges on the one
side and institutions of higher education, in particular, those imparting professional
education, on the other side. In the former, the scope for merit−based selection is
practically nil and hence may not call for regulation. But in the case of the latter,
transparency and merit have to be unavoidably taken care of and cannot be
compromised. There could be regulatory measures for ensuring educational
standards and maintaining excellence thereof. (See para 161, answer to Question 4, in
Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481.) The source of this distinction between two types
of educational institutions referred to hereinabove is to be found in the principle that
right to administer does not include a right to maladminister.
106. S.B. Sinha, J. has, in his separate opinion in Islamic Academy, (2003) 6 SCC
697, described (in para 199) the situation as a pyramid−like situation and suggested
the right of minority to be read along with the fundamental duty. Higher the level of
education, lesser are the seats and higher weighs the consideration for merit. It will,
necessarily, call for more State intervention and lesser say for the minority.
107. Educational institutions imparting higher education i.e. graduate level and
above and in particular specialised education such as technical or professional,
constitute a separate class. While embarking upon resolving issues of constitutional
significance, where the letter of the Constitution is not clear, we have to keep in view
the spirit of the Constitution, as spelt out by its entire scheme. Education aimed at
imparting professional or technical qualifications stands on a different footing from
other educational instruction. Apart from other provisions, Article 19(6) is a clear
indicator and so are clauses (h) and (j) of Article 51−A. Education up to the
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
40

undergraduate level aims at imparting knowledge just to enrich the mind and shape
the personality of a student. Graduate−level study is a doorway to admissions in
educational institutions imparting professional or technical or other higher education
and, therefore, at that level, the considerations akin to those relevant for professional
or technical educational institutions step in and become relevant.
This is in the national interest and strengthening the national wealth, education included. Education
up to the undergraduate level on the one hand and education at the graduate and postgraduate
levels and in professional and technical institutions on the other are to be treated on different levels
inviting not identical considerations, is a proposition not open to any more debate after Pai
Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481. A number of legislations occupying the field of education whose
constitutional validity has been tested and accepted suggest that while recognition or affiliation may
not be a must for education up to undergraduate level or, even if required, may be granted as a
matter of routine, recognition or affiliation is a must and subject to rigorous scrutiny when it comes
to educational institutions awarding degrees, graduate or postgraduate, postgraduate diplomas and
degrees in technical or professional disciplines. Some such legislations are found referred in paras
81 and 82 of S.B. Sinha, J.’s opinion in Islamic Academy, (2003) 6 SCC 697.” Dealing with unaided
minority educational institutions in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), the court observed that Article
30 does not come in the way of the State stepping in to secure transparency and recognition of merit
in the matter of admissions. Regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards can be framed.
In the case of professional education, transparency and merit have to be unavoidably taken care of
and cannot be compromised.
30. In Sindhi Education Society and Anr. v. Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi and Ors.,
(2010) 8 SCC 49, the Court opined that measures to regulate the courses of study, qualifications,
and appointment of teachers, the conditions of employment are germane to the affiliation of
minority institutions. The Court held thus:
“47. Still another seven−Judge Bench of this Court, in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s
College Society, (1974) 1 SCC 717, was primarily concerned with the scope of Articles
29 and 30 of the Constitution, relating to the rights of minorities to impart general
education and applicability of the concept of affiliation to such institutions. Of
course, the Court held that there was no fundamental right of a minority institution
to get affiliation from a university. When a minority institution applies to a university
to be affiliated, it expresses its choice to participate in the system of general
education and courses of instructions prescribed by that university, and it agrees to
follow the uniform courses of study. Therefore, measures which will regulate the
courses of study, the qualifications and appointment of teachers, the conditions of
employment of teachers, the health, hygiene of students and the other facilities are
germane to affiliation of minority institutions.
55. The respondents have placed reliance upon the law stated by the Bench that any
regulation framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to all educational
institutions, whether run by majority or the minority. Such a limitation must be read
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
41

into Article 30. The rule under Article 30(1) cannot be such as to override the
national interest or to prevent the Government from framing regulations in that
behalf. It is, of course, true that government regulations cannot destroy the minority
character of the institution or make a right to establish and administer a mere
illusion; but the right under Article 30 is not so absolute as to be above the law.
56. The appellant also seeks to derive benefit from the view that the courts have also
held that the right to administer is not absolute and is subject to reasonable
regulations for the benefit of the institutions as the vehicle of education consistent
with the national interest. Such general laws of the land would also be applicable to
the minority institutions as well. There is no reason why regulations or conditions
concerning generally the welfare of the students and teachers should not be made
applicable in order to provide a proper academic atmosphere. As such, the provisions
do not, in any way, interfere with the right of administration or management under
Article 30(1). Any law, rule or regulation, that would put the educational institutions
run by the minorities at a disadvantage, when compared to the institutions run by the
others, will have to be struck down. At the same time, there may not be any reverse
discrimination.
92. The right under clause (1) of Article 30 is not absolute but subject to reasonable
restrictions which, inter alia, may be framed having regard to the public interest and
national interest of the country. Regulation can also be framed to prevent
maladministration as well as for laying down standards of education, teaching,
maintenance of discipline, public order, health, morality, etc. It is also well settled
that a minority institution does not cease to be so, the moment grant−in−aid is
received by the institution. An aided minority educational institution, therefore,
would be entitled to have the right of admission of students belonging to the minority
group and, at the same time, would be required to admit a reasonable extent of non−
minority students, to the extent, that the right in Article 30(1) is not substantially
impaired and further, the citizen’s right under Article 29(2) is not infringed.” In
Chandana Das (Malakar) v. State of West Bengal and Ors., (2015) 12 SCC 140, the
Court observed that the Government can frame the conditions of eligibility for
appointment of such teachers, thus:
“21. It is unnecessary to multiply decisions on the subject for the legal position is well
settled. Linguistic institution and religious are entitled to establish and administer
their institutions. Such right of administration includes the right of appointing
teachers of its choice but does not denude the State of its power to frame regulations
that may prescribe the conditions of eligibility for appointment of such teachers. The
regulations can also prescribe measures to ensure that the institution is run
efficiently for the right to administer does not include the right to maladministration.
While grant−in−aid is not included in the guarantee contained in the Constitution to
linguistic and religious minorities for establishing and running their educational
institutions, such grant cannot be denied to such institutions only because the
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
42

institutions are established by linguistic or religious minority. Grant of aid cannot,
however, be made subservient to conditions which deprive the institution of their
substantive right of administering such institutions. Suffice it to say that once
Respondent 4 Institution is held to be a minority institution entitled to the protection
of Articles 26 and 30 of the Constitution of India the right to appoint teachers of its
choice who satisfy the conditions of eligibility prescribed for such appointments
under the relevant rules is implicit in their rights to administer such institutions.
Such rights cannot then be diluted by the State or its functionaries insisting that the
appointment should be made only with the approval of the Director or by following
the mechanism generally prescribed for institutions that do not enjoy the minority
status.”
31. In Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra), the Constitution Bench of this Court
considered the provisions of Articles 19(1)(g), 19(6), 26 and 30 in relation to the right to freedom of
occupation of private unaided minority and non−minority educational institutions. This Court
observed that the activity of education is neither trade nor profession, i.e., commercialisation and
profiteering cannot be permitted. It is open to impose reasonable restrictions in the interest of
general public. The education cannot be allowed to be a purely economic activity; it is a welfare
activity aimed at achieving more egalitarian and prosperous society to bring out social
transformation and upliftment of the nation.
(a) This Court further opined that private unaided minority and non−minority institutions have a
right to occupation under Article 19(1), the said right is not absolute and subject to reasonable
restriction in larger public interest of students community to promote merit, achieve excellence and
curb malpractices by holding common entrance test for admission and fee structure can
undoubtedly be regulated in such institutions.
(b) This Court in Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra) also held that unless the
admission procedure and fixation of fees are regulated and controlled at the initial stage, the evil of
unfair practice of granting admission on available seats guided by the paying capacity of the
candidates would be impossible to curb. The Court also noted the menace of the fee prevailing in the
various educational professional institutions and in the context of Articles 19(1)(g), 19(6), 30, 41 and
47, and considering the Schedule VII, Entry 25 of List III and Entry 63−66 of List I, this Court held
that concerning "professional unaided minority" and "non−minority institutions", common
entrance test has to be conducted by the State and regulation of the fee structure by it is permissible.
The Court took note of the large−scale malpractices, exploitation of students, profiteering, and
commercialisation and entrance examination held by various institutions failing the triple test of
having fair, transparent, and non−exploitative process. The Court held that reasonable restriction
can be imposed to regulate admission and fee structure.
The Court also observed about statutory functioning of the healthcare system in the country and the
poor functioning of the MCI.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
43

(c) The Court further considered the criteria of proportionality and emphasised for proper balance
between the two facets viz. the rights and limitations imposed upon it by a statute. The concept of
proportionality is an appropriate criterion. The law imposing restrictions will be treated as
proportional if it is meant to achieve a proper purpose. If the measures taken to achieve such a goal
are rationally connected to the object, such steps are necessary. The Court considered the concept of
proportionality thus:
“57. It is well settled that the right under Article 19(1)(g) is not absolute in terms but
is subject to reasonable restrictions under clause (6). Reasonableness has to be
determined having regard to the nature of right alleged to be infringed, purpose of
the restriction, extent of restriction and other relevant factors. In applying these
factors, one cannot lose sight of the directive principles of State policy. The Court has
to try to strike a just balance between the fundamental rights and the larger interest
of the society. The Court interferes with a statute if it clearly violates the fundamental
rights. The Court proceeds on the footing that the legislature understands the needs
of the people. The Constitution is primarily for the common man. Larger interest and
welfare of student community to promote merit, achieve excellence and curb
malpractices, fee and admissions can certainly be regulated.
58. Let us carry out this discussion in some more detail as this is the central issue
raised by the appellants.
Doctrine of proportionality explained and applied
59. Undoubtedly, the right to establish and manage the educational institutions is a
fundamental right recognised under Article 19(1)(g) of the Act. It also cannot be
denied that this right is not “absolute” and is subject to limitations i.e. “reasonable
restrictions” that can be imposed by law on the exercise of the rights that are
conferred under clause (1) of Article 19. Those restrictions, however, have to be
reasonable.
Further, such restrictions should be “in the interest of general public”, which conditions are
stipulated in clause (6) of Article 19, as under:
“19. (6) Nothing in sub−clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any
existing law insofar as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of the right conferred by the said sub−clause, and, in particular, nothing in
the said sub− clause shall affect the operation of any existing law insofar as it relates
to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to—
(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession
or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
44

(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State,
of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or
partial, of citizens or otherwise.”
60. Another significant feature which can be noticed from the reading of the
aforesaid clause is that the State is empowered to make any law relating to the
professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or
carrying on any occupation or trade or business. Thus, while examining as to whether
the impugned provisions of the statute and rules amount to reasonable restrictions
and are brought out in the interest of the general public, the exercise that is required
to be undertaken is the balancing of fundamental right to carry on occupation on the
one hand and the restrictions imposed on the other hand. This is what is known as
“doctrine of proportionality”. Jurisprudentially, “proportionality” can be defined as
the set of rules determining the necessary and sufficient conditions for limitation of a
constitutionally protected right by a law to be constitutionally permissible. According
to Aharon Barak (former Chief Justice, Supreme Court of Israel), there are four sub−
components of proportionality which need to be satisfied [Aharon Barak,
Proportionality: Constitutional Rights and Their Limitation (Cambridge University
Press 2012)], a limitation of a constitutional right will be constitutionally permissible
if:
(i) it is designated for a proper purpose;
(ii) the measures undertaken to effectuate such a limitation are rationally connected
to the fulfilment of that purpose;
(iii) the measures undertaken are necessary in that there are no alternative measures
that may similarly achieve that same purpose with a lesser degree of limitation; and
finally
(iv) there needs to be a proper relation (“proportionality stricto sensu” or
“balancing”) between the importance of achieving the proper purpose and the social
importance of preventing the limitation on the constitutional right.
61. Modern theory of constitutional rights draws a fundamental distinction between the scope of the
constitutional rights, and the extent of its protection. Insofar as the scope of constitutional rights is
concerned, it marks the outer boundaries of the said rights and defines its contents. The extent of its
protection prescribes the limitations on the exercises of the rights within its scope. In that sense, it
defines the justification for limitations that can be imposed on such a right.
62. It is now almost accepted that there are no absolute constitutional rights and all such rights are
related. As per the analysis of Aharon Barak, two key elements in developing the modern
constitutional theory of recognising positive constitutional rights along with its limitations are the
notions of democracy and the rule of law. Thus, the requirement of proportional limitations of
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
45

constitutional rights by a sub− constitutional law i.e. the statute, is derived from an interpretation of
the notion of democracy itself. Insofar as the Indian Constitution is concerned, democracy is treated
as the basic feature of the Constitution and is specifically accorded a constitutional status that is
recognised in the Preamble of the Constitution itself. It is also unerringly accepted that this notion
of democracy includes human rights which is the cornerstone of Indian democracy. Once we accept
the aforesaid theory (and there cannot be any denial thereof), as a fortiori, it has also to be accepted
that democracy is based on a balance between constitutional rights and the public interests. In fact,
such a provision in Article 19 itself on the one hand guarantees some certain freedoms in clause (1)
of Article 19 and at the same time empowers the State to impose reasonable restrictions on those
freedoms in public interest. This notion accepts the modern constitutional theory that the
constitutional rights are related. This relativity means that a constitutional licence to limit those
rights is granted where such a limitation will be justified to protect public interest or the rights of
others. This phenomenon—of both the right and its limitation in the Constitution—exemplifies the
inherent tension between democracy’s two fundamental elements. On the one hand is the right’s
element, which constitutes a fundamental component of substantive democracy; on the other hand
is the people element, limiting those very rights through their representatives. These two constitute
a fundamental component of the notion of democracy, though this time in its formal aspect. How
can this tension be resolved? The answer is that this tension is not resolved by eliminating the
“losing” facet from the Constitution. Rather, the tension is resolved by way of a proper balancing of
the competing principles. This is one of the expressions of the multi−faceted nature of democracy.
Indeed, the inherent tension between democracy’s different facets is a “constructive tension”. It
enables each facet to develop while harmoniously coexisting with the others. The best way to achieve
this peaceful coexistence is through balancing between the competing interests. Such balancing
enables each facet to develop alongside the other facets, not in their place. This tension between the
two fundamental aspects—rights on the one hand and its limitation on the other hand—is to be
resolved by balancing the two so that they harmoniously coexist with each other. This balancing is to
be done keeping in mind the relative social values of each competitive aspects when considered in
proper context.
63. In this direction, the next question that arises is as to what criteria is to be adopted for a proper
balance between the two facets viz. the rights and limitations imposed upon it by a statute. Here
comes the concept of “proportionality”, which is a proper criterion. To put it pithily, when a law
limits a constitutional right, such a limitation is constitutional if it is proportional. The law imposing
restrictions will be treated as proportional if it is meant to achieve a proper purpose, and if the
measures taken to achieve such a purpose are rationally connected to the purpose, and such
measures are necessary. This essence of doctrine of proportionality is beautifully captured by
Dickson, C.J. of Canada in R. v. Oakes, (1986) 1 SCR 103 (Can SC) in the following words (at p. 138):
“To establish that a limit is reasonable and demonstrably justified in a free and
democratic society, two central criteria must be satisfied. First, the objective, which
the measures, responsible for a limit on a Charter right or freedom are designed to
serve, must be “of” sufficient importance to warrant overriding a constitutional
protected right or freedom … Second … the party invoking Section 1 must show that
the means chosen are reasonable and demonstrably justified. This involves “a form of
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
46

proportionality test…” Although the nature of the proportionality test will vary
depending on the circumstances, in each case courts will be required to balance the
interests of society with those of individuals and groups. There are, in my view, three
important components of a proportionality test. First, the measures adopted must be
… rationally connected to the objective. Second, the means … should impair “as little
as possible” the right or freedom in question … Third, there must be a proportionality
between the effects of the measures which are responsible for limiting the Charter
right or freedom, and the objective which has been identified as of “sufficient
importance”. The more severe the deleterious effects of a measure, the more
important the objective must be if the measure is to be reasonable and demonstrably
justified in a free and democratic society.”
64. The exercise which, therefore, is to be taken is to find out as to whether the limitation of
constitutional rights is for a purpose that is reasonable and necessary in a democratic society and
such an exercise involves the weighing up of competitive values, and ultimately an assessment based
on proportionality i.e. balancing of different interests.”
(d) In Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra), the Court, while dealing with reasonable
restriction on rights under Article 19 observed:
“65. We may unhesitatingly remark that this doctrine of proportionality, explained
hereinabove in brief, is enshrined in Article 19 itself when we read clause (1) along
with clause (6) thereof. While defining as to what constitutes a reasonable restriction,
this Court in a plethora of judgments has held that the expression “reasonable
restriction” seeks to strike a balance between the freedom guaranteed by any of the
sub− clauses of clause (1) of Article 19 and the social control permitted by any of the
clauses (2) to (6). It is held that the expression “reasonable” connotes that the
limitation imposed on a person in the enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary
or of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interests of public. Further,
in order to be reasonable, the restriction must have a reasonable relation to the object
which the legislation seeks to achieve, and must not go in excess of that object (see
P.P. Enterprises v. Union of India, (1982) 2 SCC
33). At the same time, reasonableness of a restriction has to be determined in an
objective manner and from the standpoint of the interests of the general public and
not from the point of view of the persons upon whom the restrictions are imposed or
upon abstract considerations (see Mohd. Hanif Quareshi v.
State of Bihar, AIR 1958 SC 731). In M.R.F. Ltd. v. State of Kerala, (1998) 8 SCC 227, this Court held
that in examining the reasonableness of a statutory provision one has to keep in mind the following
factors:
(1) The directive principles of State policy.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
47

(2) Restrictions must not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature so as to go beyond the
requirement of the interest of the general public.
(3) In order to judge the reasonableness of the restrictions, no abstract or general
pattern or a fixed principle can be laid down so as to be of universal application and
the same will vary from case to case as also with regard to changing conditions,
values of human life, social philosophy of the Constitution, prevailing conditions and
the surrounding circumstances.
(4) A just balance has to be struck between the restrictions imposed and the social
control envisaged by Article 19(6).
(5) Prevailing social values as also social needs which are intended to be satisfied by
the restrictions. (6) There must be a direct and proximate nexus or reasonable
connection between the restrictions imposed and the object sought to be achieved. If
there is a direct nexus between the restrictions, and the object of the Act, then a
strong presumption in favour of the constitutionality of the Act will naturally arise.”
(e) Concerning necessity of regulatory framework, the Court opined:
“85. No doubt, we have entered into an era of liberalisation of the economy, famously
termed as “globalisation” as well. In such an economy, private players are
undoubtedly given much more freedom in economic activities, as the recognition has
drawn to the realities that the economic activities, including profession, business,
occupation, etc. are not normal forte of the State and the State should have minimal
role therein. It is for this reason, many sectors which were hitherto State monopolies,
like telecom, power, insurance, civil aviation, etc. have now opened up for private
enterprise. Even in the field of education the State/Government was playing a
dominant role inasmuch as it was thought desirable that in a welfare State it is the
fundamental duty, as a component of directive principles, to impart education to the
masses and commoners as well as weaker sections of the society, at affordable rates.
It was almost treated as solemn duty of the Government to establish adequate
number of educational institutions at all levels i.e. from primary level to higher
education and in all fields including technical, scientific and professional, to cater to
the varied sections of the society, particularly, when one− third of the population of
the country is poverty−stricken with large percentage as illiterate. With liberalisation,
the Government has encouraged establishments of privately managed institutions. It
is done with the hope that the private sector will play vital role in the field of
education with philanthropic approach/ideals in mind as this activity is not to be
taken for the purpose of profiteering, but more as a societal welfare.
86. It is, therefore, to be borne in mind that the occupation of education cannot be
treated on a par with other economic activities. In this field, the State cannot remain
a mute spectator and has to necessarily step in in order to prevent exploitation,
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
48

privatisation and commercialisation by the private sector. It would be pertinent to
mention that even in respect of those economic activities which are undertaken by
the private sector essentially with the objective of profit− making (and there is
nothing bad about it), while throwing open such kind of business activities in the
hands of private sector, the State has introduced regulatory regime as well by
providing regulations under the relevant statutes.
89. With the advent of globalisation and liberalisation, though the market economy is
restored, at the same time, it is also felt that market economies should not exist in
pure form. Some regulation of the various industries is required rather than allowing
self−regulation by market forces. This intervention through regulatory bodies,
particularly in pricing, is considered necessary for the welfare of the society and the
economists point out that such regulatory economy does not rob the character of a
market economy which still remains a market economy. Justification for regulatory
bodies even in such industries managed by private sector lies in the welfare of people.
Regulatory measures are felt necessary to promote basic well being for individuals in
need. It is because of this reason that we find regulatory bodies in all vital industries
like, insurance, electricity and power, telecommunications, etc.
90. Thus, it is felt that in any welfare economy, even for private industries, there is a
need for regulatory body and such a regulatory framework for education sector
becomes all the more necessary. It would be more so when, unlike other industries,
commercialisation of education is not permitted as mandated by the Constitution of
India, backed by various judgments of this Court to the effect that profiteering in the
education is to be avoided.”
(f) The Court held that the regulatory mechanism for centralised examination is legal
and constitutional and does not infringe on the fundamental rights of the minority or
non−minority to establish and administer educational institutions. It observed:
“57. It is well settled that the right under Article 19(1)(g) is not absolute in terms but
is subject to reasonable restrictions under clause (6). Reasonableness has to be
determined having regard to the nature of right alleged to be infringed, purpose of
the restriction, extent of restriction and other relevant factors. In applying these
factors, one cannot lose sight of the directive principles of State policy. The Court has
to try to strike a just balance between the fundamental rights and the larger interest
of the society. The Court interferes with a statute if it clearly violates the fundamental
rights. The Court proceeds on the footing that the legislature understands the needs
of the people. The Constitution is primarily for the common man.
Larger interest and welfare of student community to promote merit, achieve
excellence and curb malpractices, fee and admissions can certainly be regulated.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
49

“97. The very object of setting up institutions for the State is a welfare function, for
the purpose of excelling in educational standards. On the other hand, the primary
motivation for private parties is profit motive or philanthropy. When the primary
motivation for institutions is profit motive, it is natural that many means to achieve
the same shall be adopted by the private institutions which leads to a large degree of
secrecy and corruption. As such, the mechanism of regulations as envisaged under
the impugned laws is legal, constitutional, fair, transparent and uphold the primary
criteria of merit. The same does not infringe on the fundamental rights of either the
minorities or the non− minorities to establish and administer educational institutions
and must as such be upheld as valid.”
(g) The Court also took note of prevailing situation of corruption in the field of
education and commercialisation of education thus:
“68. We are of the view that the larger public interest warrants such a measure.
Having regard to the malpractices which are noticed in the CET conducted by such
private institutions themselves, for which plethora of material is produced, it is,
undoubtedly, in the larger interest and welfare of the student community to promote
merit, add excellence and curb malpractices. The extent of restriction has to be
viewed keeping in view all these factors and, therefore, we feel that the impugned
provisions which may amount to “restrictions” on the right of the appellants to carry
on their “occupation”, are clearly “reasonable” and satisfied the test of
proportionality.”
86. It is, therefore, to be borne in mind that the occupation of education cannot be
treated on a par with other economic activities. In this field, the State cannot remain
a mute spectator and has to necessarily step in in order to prevent exploitation,
privatisation and commercialisation by the private sector. It would be pertinent to
mention that even in respect of those economic activities which are undertaken by
the private sector essentially with the objective of profit− making (and there is
nothing bad about it), while throwing open such kind of business activities in the
hands of private sector, the State has introduced regulatory regime as well by
providing regulations under the relevant statutes.
96. As is evident from the facts mentioned by the State of Madhya Pradesh in its reply
filed in IA No. 83 of 2015, the Association of Private Colleges has failed to hold their
CETs in a fair, transparent and rational manner. The accountability and transparency
in State actions is much higher than in private actions. It is needless to say that the
incidents of corruption in the State machinery were brought in the public eye
immediately and have been addressed expeditiously. The same could never have been
done in case of private actions.
Even on a keel of comparative efficiency, it is more than evident that the State process is far more
transparent and fair than one that is devised by the private colleges which have no mechanism of
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
50

any checks and balances. The State agencies are subject to the Right to Information Act, audit, State
Legislature, anti−corruption agencies, Lokayukta, etc.
172. Maintenance and improvement of public health and to provide health care and medical services
is the constitutional obligation of the State. To discharge this constitutional obligation, the State
must have the doctors with professional excellence and commitment who are ready to give medical
advice and services to the public at large. The State can satisfactorily discharge its constitutional
obligation only when the aspiring students enter into the profession based on merit. None of these
lofty ideals can be achieved without having good and committed medical professionals.
190. For the foregoing discussion, I hold that the State has the legislative competence to enact the
impugned legislation—the 2007 Act to hold common entrance test for admission to professional
educational institutions and to determine the fee and the High Court has rightly upheld the validity
of the impugned legislation. Regulations sought to be imposed by the impugned legislation on
admission by common entrance test conducted by the State and determination of fee are in
compliance of the directions and observations in T.M.A. Pai, (2002) 8 SCC 481, Islamic Academy of
Education, (2003) 6 SCC 697 and P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537. Regulations on admission
process are necessary in the larger public interest and welfare of the student community to ensure
fairness and transparency in the admission and to promote merit and excellence. Regulation on
fixation of fee is to protect the rights of the students in having access to higher education without
being subjected to exploitation in the form of profiteering. With the above reasonings, I concur with
the majority view in upholding the validity of the impugned legislation and affirm the well−merited
decision of the High Court.”
(h) The Court in Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra) while considering the decision
in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) opined that Court did not give complete freedom to admit the
students and also as to fixation of fee. Admission has to be based on merit, particularly in
professional educational institutions. This Court observed thus:
“34. In the modern age, therefore, particularly after the policy of liberalisation
adopted by the State, educational institutions by private bodies are allowed to be
established. There is a paradigm shift over from the era of complete government
control over education (like other economic and commercial activities) to a situation
where private players are allowed to mushroom. But at the same time, regulatory
mechanism is provided thereby ensuring that such private institutions work within
such regulatory regime. When it comes to education, it is expected that unaided
private institutions provide quality education and at the same time they are given
“freedom in joints” with minimal Government interference, except what comes under
regulatory regime. Though education is now treated as an “occupation” and, thus, has
become a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, at
the same time shackles are put insofar as this particular occupation is concerned
which is termed as “noble”. Therefore, profiteering and commercialisation are not
permitted and no capitation fee can be charged. The admission of students has to be
on merit and not at the whims and fancies of the educational institutions. Merit can
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
51

be tested by adopting some methodology and few such methods are suggested in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, which includes holding of CET. It is to be
ensured that this admission process meets the triple test of transparency, fairness
and non−exploitativeness.
37. Insofar as the first part of the question is concerned, it does not pose any problem
and the answer goes in favour of the appellants. We may recapitulate here that Article
26 of the Constitution gives freedom to every religious denomination or any section
thereof by conferring certain rights which include right to establish and maintain
institutions for religious and charitable purposes. Thus, insofar as religious
denominations or any section thereof are concerned, they were given right to
establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes making it a
fundamental right. Likewise, Article 30 confers upon minorities fundamental right to
establish and administer educational institutions. Insofar as Article 26 is concerned,
it comes under the caption “Right to Freedom of Religion”. As far as Article 30 is
concerned, it is under the heading “Cultural and Educational Rights”. Thus, rights of
the minorities to establish and administer educational institutions were always
recognised as fundamental rights. Further, the right of private unaided professional
institutions to establish and manage educational institutions was not clearly
recognised as a fundamental right covered under Article 19(1)
(g) and categorically rejected by the Constitution Bench of this Court comprising of
five Judges in Unni Krishnan, (1993) 1 SCC 645. It was held in para 198 of the
judgment that: (SCC p. 752) “198. [w]e are, therefore, of the opinion, adopting the
line of reasoning in State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, AIR 1957 SC 699,
that imparting education cannot be treated as a trade or business. Education cannot
be allowed to be converted into commerce nor can petitioners seek to obtain the said
result by relying upon the wider meaning of “occupation”.”
38. In Unni Krishnan case, (1993) 1 SCC 645, this Court also rejected the argument
that the said activity could be classified as a “profession”. However, the right of
professional institutions to establish and manage educational institutions was finally
regarded as an “occupation” befitting the recognition of this right as a fundamental
right under Article 19(1)(g) in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, in the
following words: (SCC p. 535, para 25) “25. The establishment and running of an
educational institution where a large number of persons are employed as teachers or
administrative staff, and an activity is carried on that results in the imparting of
knowledge to the students, must necessarily be regarded as an occupation, even if
there is no element of profit generation. It is difficult to comprehend that education,
per se, will not fall under any of the four expressions in Article 19(1)(g). “Occupation”
would be an activity of a person undertaken as a means of livelihood or a mission in
life. The abovequoted observations in Sodan Singh case, (1989) 4 SCC 155, correctly
interpret the expression “occupation” in Article 19(1)(g).”
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
52

40. It becomes necessary to point out that while treating the managing of educational
institution as an “occupation”, the Court was categorical that this activity could not
be treated as “business” or “profession”. This right to carry on the occupation that
education is, the same is not put on a par with other occupations or business
activities or even other professions. It is a category apart which was carved out by this
Court in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481. There was a specific purpose for
not doing so. Education is treated as a noble “occupation” on “no profit no loss” basis.
Thus, those who establish and are managing the educational institutions are not
expected to indulge in profiteering or commercialising this noble activity. Keeping
this objective in mind, the Court did not give complete freedom to the educational
institutions in respect of right to admit the students and also with regard to fixation
of fee. As far as admission of students is concerned, the Court was categorical that
such admissions have to be on the basis of merit when it comes to higher education,
particularly in professional institutions.”
(i) In Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra), the Court considered
decision in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), and observed that Government is
permitted to frame regulations for unaided private professional educational
institutions, thus:
“42. In order to see that merit is adjudged suitably and appropriately, the Court
candidly laid down that the procedure for admission should be so devised which
satisfies the triple test of being fair, transparent and non−exploitative. The next
question was as to how the aforesaid objective could be achieved? For determining
such merit, the Court showed the path in para 59 by observing that such merit should
be determined either by the marks that students obtained at qualifying examination
or at CET conducted by the institutions or in the case of professional colleges, by
government agencies. Para 59 suggesting these modes reads as under: (T.M.A. Pai
Foundation case, (2002) 8 SCC 481, SCC p. 546) “59. Merit is usually determined, for
admission to professional and higher education colleges, by either the marks that the
student obtains at the qualifying examination or school leaving certificate stage
followed by the interview, or by a common entrance test conducted by the institution,
or in the case of professional colleges, by government agencies.” This paragraph very
specifically authorises CET to be conducted by government agencies in the case of
professional colleges.
43. In order to ensure that the said CET is fair, transparent and merit−based, T.M.A.
Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, also permitted the Government to frame
regulations for unaided private professional educational institutions. Paras 67 and 68
which permit framing of such regulations are reproduced below: (SCC p. 549) “67.
We now come to the regulations that can be framed relating to private unaided
professional institutions.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
53

68. It would be unfair to apply the same rules and regulations regulating admission
to both aided and unaided professional institutions. It must be borne in mind that
unaided professional institutions are entitled to autonomy in their administration
while, at the same time, they do not forego or discard the principle of merit. It would,
therefore, be permissible for the university or the Government, at the time of
granting recognition, to require a private unaided institution to provide for merit−
based selection while, at the same time, giving the management sufficient discretion
in admitting students. This can be done through various methods. For instance, a
certain percentage of the seats can be reserved for admission by the management out
of those students who have passed the common entrance test held by itself or by the
State/university and have applied to the college concerned for admission, while the
rest of the seats may be filled up on the basis of counselling by the State agency. This
will incidentally take care of poorer and backward sections of the society. The
prescription of percentage for this purpose has to be done by the Government
according to the local needs and different percentages can be fixed for minority
unaided and non− minority unaided and professional colleges. The same principles
may be applied to other non−professional but unaided educational institutions viz.
graduation and postgraduation non−professional colleges or institutes.”
44. A plea was raised by the appellants that by exercising the power to frame
regulations, the State could not usurp the very function of conducting this admission
test by the educational institutions. It was argued that it only meant that such a CET
is to be conducted by the educational institutions themselves and the Government
could only frame the regulations to regulate such admission tests to be conducted by
the educational institutions and could not take away the function of holding CET.
45. This argument has to be rejected in view of the unambiguous and categorical
interpretation given by the Supreme Court in P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537, with
respect to certain observations, particularly in para 68 in T.M.A. Pai Foundation,
(2002) 8 SCC 481. In this behalf, we would like to recapitulate that in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, a Bench of eleven Judges dealt with the issues of
scope of right to set up educational institutions by private aided or unaided, minority
or non−minority institutions and the extent of government regulation of the said
right. It was held that the right to establish and administer an institution included the
right to admit students and to set up a reasonable fee structure. But the said right
could be regulated to ensure maintenance of proper academic standards, atmosphere
and infrastructure. Fixing of rigid fee structure, dictating the formation and
composition of a governing body, compulsory nomination of teachers and staff for
appointment or nominating students for admissions would be unacceptable
restrictions. However, occupation of education was not business but profession
involving charitable activity. The State can forbid charging of capitation fee and
profiteering. The object of setting up educational institution is not to make profit.
There could, however, be a reasonable revenue surplus for development of education.
For admission, merit must play an important role. The State or the University could
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
54

require private unaided institution to provide for merit−based selection while giving
sufficient discretion in admitting students. Certain percentage of seats could be
reserved for admission by management out of students who have passed CET held by
the institution or by the State/University. Interpretation of certain observations in
para 68 of the judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, has been a
matter of debate to which we will advert to in detail hereinafter.
48. The matter was then considered by a larger Bench of seven Judges in P.A.
Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537. It was held that the two committees for monitoring
admission procedure and determining fee structure as per the judgment in Islamic
Academy of Education, (2003) 6 SCC 697, were permissible as regulatory measures
aimed at protecting the student community as a whole as also the minority
themselves in maintaining required standards of professional education on non−
exploitative terms. This did not violate Article 30(1) or Article 19(1)(g). It was
observed that: (P.A. Inamdar case, (2005) 6 SCC 537, SCC p. 607, para 145) “145. …
Unless the admission procedure and fixation of fees is regulated and controlled at the
initial stage, the evil of unfair practice of granting admission on available seats
guided by the paying capacity of the candidates would be impossible to curb.”
(emphasis supplied) On this ground, suggestion of the institutions to achieve the
purpose for which committees had been set up by post−audit checks after the
institutions adopted their own admission procedure and fee structure was rejected.
The committees were, thus, allowed to continue for regulating the admissions and the
fee structure until a suitable legislation or regulations were framed by the States. It
was left to the Central Government and the State Governments to come out with a
detailed well−thought out legislation setting up a suitable mechanism for regulating
admission procedure and fee structure. Para 68 in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case,
(2002) 8 SCC 481, was explained by stating that observations permitting the
management to reserve certain seats were meant for poorer and backward sections as
per local needs. It did not mean to ignore the merit. It was also held that CET could
be held, otherwise, merit becomes a casualty. There is, thus, no bar to CET being held
by a State agency when the law so provides.”
(j) The Court held that entrance examination is a regulatory measure and does not
infringe on the rights of the institutions. It opined:
“49. Thus, the contention raised on behalf of the appellants that the private medical
colleges had absolute right to make admissions or to fix fee is not consistent with the
earlier decisions of this Court. Neither merit could be compromised in admissions to
professional institutions nor capitation fee could be permitted. To achieve these
objects it is open to the State to introduce regulatory measures. We are unable to
accept the submission that the State could intervene only after proving that merit was
compromised or capitation fee was being charged. As observed in the earlier
decisions of this Court, post−audit measures would not meet the regulatory
requirements. Control was required at the initial stage itself. Therefore, our answer to
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
55

the first question is that though “occupation” is a fundamental right, which gives
right to the educational institutions to admit the students and also fix the fee, at the
same time, scope of such rights has been discussed and limitations imposed
thereupon by the aforesaid judgments themselves explaining the nature of limitations
on these rights.
55. It would be necessary to clarify the position in respect of educational institutions
run by minorities. Having regard to the pronouncement in T.M.A. Pai Foundation,
(2002) 8 SCC 481, with lucid clarifications to the said judgment given by this Court in
P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537, it becomes clear that insofar as such regulatory
measures are concerned, the same can be adopted by the State in respect of
minority−run institutions as well. Reliance placed by the appellants in St. Stephen’s
College v. University of Delhi, (1992) 1 SCC 558, may not be of much help as that case
did not concern with professional educational institutions.
67. Undoubtedly, right to establish and administer educational institutions is treated
as a fundamental right as it is termed “occupation”, which is one of the freedoms
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g). It was so recognised for the first time in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481. Even while doing so, this right came with certain
clutches and shackles. The Court made it clear that it is a noble occupation which
would not permit commercialisation or profiteering and, therefore, such educational
institutions are to be run on “no profit no loss basis”. While explaining the scope of
this right, right to admit students and right to fix fee was accepted as facets of this
right, the Court again added caution thereto by mandating that admissions to the
educational institutions imparting higher education, and in particular professional
education, have to admit the students based on merit. For judging the merit, the
Court indicated that there can be a CET.
While doing so, it also specifically stated that in case of admission to professional courses such a
CET can be conducted by the State. If such a power is exercised by the State assuming the function
of CET, this was so recognised in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481 itself, as a measure of
“reasonable restriction on the said right”. Islamic Academy of Education, (2003) 6 SCC 697, further
clarified the contour of such function of the State while interpreting T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002)
8 SCC 481, itself wherein it was held that there can be committees constituted to supervise
conducting of such CET. This process of interpretative balancing and constitutional balancing was
remarkably achieved in P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537, by not only giving its premature to
deholding (sic imprimatur to the holding) of CET but it went further to hold that agency conducting
the CET must be the one which enjoys the utmost credibility and expertise in the matter to achieve
fulfilment of twin objectives of transparency and merit and for that purpose it permitted the State to
provide a procedure of holding a CET in the interest of securing fair and merit−based admissions
and preventing maladministration.” This Court also considered the balancing of rights even if there
is a violation of fundamental rights of the appellants to admit students by Central Examination Test
by State. It held as under:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
56

“92. In this sense, when imparting of quality education to cross−section of the
society, particularly, the weaker section and when such private educational
institutions are to rub shoulders with the State managed educational institution to
meet the challenge of the implementing ambitious constitutional promises, the
matter is to be examined in a different hue. It is this spirit which we have kept in
mind while balancing the right of these educational institutions given to them under
Article 19(1)(g) on the one hand and reasonableness of the restrictions which have
been imposed by the impugned legislation. The right to admission or right to fix the
fee guaranteed to these appellants is not taken away completely, as feared. T.M.A. Pai
Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481, gives autonomy to such institutions which remains
intact. Holding of CET under the control of the State does not impinge on this
autonomy. Admission is still in the hands of these institutions. Once it is even
conceded by the appellants that in admission of students “triple test” is to be met, the
impugned legislation aims at that. After all, the sole purpose of holding CET is to
adjudge merit and to ensure that admissions which are done by the educational
institutions, are strictly on merit. This is again to ensure larger public interest. It is
beyond comprehension that merely by assuming the power to hold CET, fundamental
right of the appellants to admit the students is taken away. Likewise, when it comes
to fixation of fee, as already dealt with in detail, the main purpose is that the State
acts as a regulator and satisfies itself that the fee which is proposed by the
educational institution does not have the element of profiteering and also that no
capitation fee, etc. is charged. In fact, this dual function of regulatory nature is going
to advance the public interest inasmuch as those students who are otherwise
meritorious but are not in a position to meet unreasonable demands of capitation fee,
etc. are not deprived of getting admissions. The impugned provisions, therefore, are
aimed at seeking laudable objectives in larger public interest. Law is not static, it has
to change with changing times and changing social/societal conditions.”
(k) The Court held that MCI Act and the rules prescribed reasonable restrictions
under Article 19(6), thus:
“53. After referring to paras 136 and 137 in P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537, it was
observed: (Assn. of Private Dental case, 2009 SCC OnLine MP 760, SCC OnLine MP
paras 34 &
37) “34. It will be thus clear from paras 136 and 137 of the judgment in P.A. Inamdar,
(2005) 6 SCC 537, quoted above, that admissions to private unaided professional
educational institutions can be made on the basis of merit of candidates determined
in the common entrance test followed by centralised counselling by the institutions
imparting same or similar professional education together or by the State or by an
agency which must enjoy utmost credibility and expertise and that the common
entrance test followed by centralised counselling must satisfy the triple test of being
fair, transparent and non−exploitative. Thus, the judgments of the Supreme Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481 and P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537,
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
57

permit holding of a common entrance test for determination of merit for admission
to private unaided professional educational institutions by the State as well as any
agency which enjoy utmost credibility and expertise in the matter and which should
ensure transparency in merit.
* * *
37. Sections 3(d), 6 and 7 of the 2007 Act by providing that the common entrance test
for determining merit for admissions in the private unaided professional educational
institutions by a common entrance test to be conducted by the State or by an agency
authorised by the State do not interfere with the autonomy of private unaided
professional educational institutions, as such private professional educational
institutions are entitled to collect the fees from the students admitted to the
institutions on the basis of merit, appoint their own staff (teaching and non−
teaching), discipline and remove the staff, provide infrastructure and other facilities
for students and do all such other things as are necessary to impart professional
education to the students. Sections 3(d), 6 and 7 of the 2007 Act, therefore, do not
impinge on the fundamental right to carry on the occupation of establishing and
administering professional educational institutions as an occupation. The only
purpose of Sections 3(d), 6 and 7 of the 2007 Act is to ensure that students of
excellence are selected on the basis of a common entrance test conducted by the State
or an agency authorised by the State and that students without excellence and merit
do not make entry into these professional educational institutions through
malpractices and influence. As has been held both in the judgments in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation, (2002) 8 SCC 481 and P.A. Inamdar, (2005) 6 SCC 537, the right of
private unaided professional educational institutions to admit students of their
choice is subject to selection of students on the basis of their merit through a
transparent, fair and non−exploitative procedure.
In our considered opinion therefore, Sections 3(d), 6 and 7 of the 2007 Act do not in any way violate
the fundamental right of citizens guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. In view of
this conclusion, it is not necessary for us to decide whether the provisions of Sections 3(d), 6 and 7
of the 2007 Act are saved by Article 15(5) of the Constitution or by the second limb of Article 19(6) of
the Constitution relating to the power of the State to make a law for creation of monopoly in its
favour in respect of any service.””
32. In Sankalp Charitable Trust (supra), various orders passed by this Court on different dates have
been reported. This Court noted that NEET has been restored by judgment dated 11.4.2016 by which
the judgment and order in Christian Medical College, Vellore and others was recalled. The
respondents were directed to hold examination for admission to MBBS and BDS courses for the
academic year 2016−17. The Court passed following order dated 28.4.2016:
“10. In view of the submissions made on behalf of the respondents, we record that
NEET shall be held as stated by the respondents. We further clarify that
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
58

notwithstanding any order passed by any court earlier with regard to not holding
NEET, this order shall operate. Therefore, no further order is required to be passed at
this stage.
11. It may be mentioned here that some learned counsel representing those who are
not parties to this petition have made submissions that in view of the judgment
passed in Christian Medical College, Vellore v. Union of India, it would not be proper
to hold NEET and this order should not affect pending matters.
12. We do not agree with the first submission for the reason that the said judgment
has already been recalled on 11−4−2016 and therefore, the Notifications dated 21−
12−2010 are in operation as on today.” On 6.5.2016, the Court directed that no
examination shall be permitted to be held for admission to MBBS or BDS studies by
any private college or association or any private/deemed university.
Relevant portion is extracted hereunder:
“23. In view of the request made by the learned Solicitor General, hearing is
adjourned to 9−5−2016. However, it is clarified that no examination shall be
permitted to be held for admission to MBBS or BDS studies by any private college or
association or any private/deemed university.
24. The issue with regard to those students, who had appeared or who are due to
appear in examinations conducted by the States in accordance with their State laws,
shall be decided after hearing the learned Solicitor General.” On 9.5.2016, in the
aforesaid matter, the Court considered various applications filed by private medical
colleges seeking clarification of order dated 28.4.2016. This Court directed as under:
“29. Medical Council of India (MCI) and Dental Council of India (DCI) issued
Notifications dated 21−12−2010, amending the existing statutory regulations to
provide for a single National Eligibility−cum−Entrance Test (NEET) for admission to
the MBBS/BDS course. The said Notifications were struck down in Christian Medical
College, Vellore v. Union of India, (2014) 2 SCC 305. The said judgment stands
recalled vide order dated 11−4−2016 in Medical Council of India v. Christian Medical
College, Vellore, (2016) 4 SCC 342.
32. In a recent Constitution Bench judgment dated 2−5−2016, in Modern Dental College & Research
Centre v. State of M.P., (2016) 7 SCC 353, the stand of the private medical colleges (including
minorities) that conducting of entrance test by the State violated the right of autonomy of the said
colleges, has been rejected. The State law providing for conducting of entrance test was upheld,
rejecting the contention that the State had no legislative competence on the subject. At the same
time, it was held that the admission involved two aspects. First, the adoption of setting up of
minimum standards of education and coordination of such standards which aspect was covered
exclusively by List I Entry 66. The second aspect is with regard to implementation of the said
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
59

standards which was covered by List III Entry 25. On the said aspect, the State could also legislate.
The two entries overlap to some extent and to that extent List I Entry 66 prevailed over the subject
covered by Entry 25.
33. Prima facie, we do not find any infirmity in the NEET regulation on the ground that it affects the
rights of the States or the private institutions. Special provisions for reservation of any category are
not subject−matter of NEET nor are the rights of minority in any manner affected by NEET. NEET
only provides for conducting entrance test for eligibility for admission to the MBBS/BDS course.
34. We thus, do not find any merit in the applications seeking modification of the order dated 28−4−
2016.”
33. In Jainarayan Chouksey (supra), the Court followed the decision in Modern Dental College and
Research Centre (supra) and opined that the said decision encompasses not only the State−
conducted centralised test but also State−conducted centralised counselling.
This Court issued a mandate for both the purposes, i.e., examination as well as counselling and held:
“5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length. We observe that
mandate of our judgment was to hold centralised entrance test followed by
centralised State counselling by the State to make it a one composite process. We,
therefore, direct that admission to all medical seats shall be conducted by centralised
counselling only by the State Government and none else.
6. If any counselling has been done by any college or university and any admission to
any medical seat has been given so far, such admission shall stand cancelled
forthwith and admission shall be given only as per centralised counselling done by
the State Government.”
34. In D.Y. Patil Vidyapeeth (supra), the Court again clarified that the decision in Modern Dental
College and Research Centre (supra) encompasses not only centralised State−conducted test but
also centralised State−conducted counselling.
35. The MCI amended vide notification dated 10.3.2017 the Regulation on Graduate Medical
Education, 1997 and Post Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000 providing for common
counselling for admission to MBBS and post−graduate medicine courses on the basis of NEET. The
said notifications were challenged by minority institutions, deemed universities, and other private
institutions by filing a writ petition before this Court. The Court vide order dated 9.5.2017 in Dar−
us−Salam Educational Trust and Ors. v.
Medical Council of India and Ors., (Writ Petition (C) No.267 of 2017) opined that common
counselling does not in any manner affect the right of minority institutions to admit students of
their own minority community. The Court held thus:
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
60

“10. Common counselling conducted by the DGHS/State Government will not in any
manner affect the rights of minority institutions to admit students of their respective
minority community. The minority quota seats, if any, in institutions run by
minorities will be filled up by minority students only. Therefore, the rights of
minority institutions are fully protected. Needless to say this arrangement will not
apply to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Jammu & Kashmir. As far as
the other States are concerned, needless to say, this arrangement shall apply to all the
colleges unless this Court has passed any different or separate order.”
36. In Yatinkumar Jasubhai Patel (supra), the Court held that introduction of NEET does not affect
the 50% State quota seat in PG medicine course. The Court also considered Section 10D of the Act of
1956 and regulations as amended by MCI. It opined as under:
“9.4. However, it is the case on behalf of the petitioners that in view of the
introduction of the NEET Scheme and in view of Section 10−D of the MCI Act, by
which admissions are to be given on the basis of merit in the NEET, such an
“institutional preference” would not be permissible. It is required to be noted that
i n t r o d u c t i o n  o f  t h e  N E E T  h a s ,  a s  s u c h ,  n o t h i n g  t o  d o  w i t h  a n y
preference/institutional preference, more particularly the “institutional preference”
as approved by this Court time and again. The purpose and object of the introduction
of NEET was to conduct a uniform entrance examination for all medical educational
institutions at the undergraduate level or postgraduate level and admissions at the
undergraduate level and postgraduate level are to be given solely on the basis of the
merits and/or marks obtained in the NEET examination only. It is required to be
noted that earlier the respective universities including Gujarat University used to
hold examination for postgraduate admission to medical courses and now instead of
such tests by Gujarat University/universities concerned, merit is to be determined on
the basis of the NEET examination results only and admissions are required to be
given on the basis of such merits or marks obtained in NEET. The only obligation by
virtue of introduction of NEET is that, once centralised admission test is conducted,
the State, its agencies, universities and institutions cannot hold any separate test for
the purpose of admission to postgraduate and PG and diploma courses and such
seats are to be filled up by the State agencies, universities/institutions for preparing
merit list as per the score obtained by the applicants in NEET examination and
therefore by introduction of NEET, Section 10−D of the MCI Act has been amended,
consequently amendment to the Post−Graduate Education Regulations, 2000,
admission to postgraduate courses are made providing for solely on the basis of the
score secured by the candidates seeking admission based on centralised examination
i.e. NEET.
9.5. Even while giving admissions in the State quota/institutional reservation quota,
still the admissions are required to be given on the basis of the merits determined on
the basis of the NEET examination results. Under the circumstances, introduction of
the NEET Scheme, as such, has nothing to do with the “institutional preference”.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
61

Therefore, the change by introduction of the NEET Scheme shall not affect the institutional
preference/reservation as approved by this Court from time to time in a catena of decisions, more
particularly the decisions referred to hereinabove. Under the guise of introduction of the NEET
Scheme, the petitioners cannot be permitted to re−agitate and/or reopen the issue with respect to
institutional preference which has been approved and settled by this Court in a catena of decisions,
more particularly the decisions referred to hereinabove.”
37. The notifications, which are questioned in the matters and the amendment made to Section 10D
as introduced in the Act of 1956 and regulations as amended by the MCI and similar provisions
inserted in the Dentists Act & Regulations, cannot be said to be taking away the rights of the
unaided minority institutions or private institutions of making admission in any manner as it is
permissible to provide regulatory mechanism at the national level and the entrance test applies even
to All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS) – the most reputed Institute of India. It is open to
provide the regulatory mechanism for admission for such courses as held in T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) the qualification and conditions of eligibility in the interest of academic standards can be
provided, and there could be regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards and
maintaining excellence in the matter of professional institution. Thus, the decision in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation (supra) rendered by 11−Judge Bench is juxtaposed to the submission raised on behalf of
petitioners.
38. In P.A. Inamdar (supra), the Court laid down the triple test of a fair, transparent and non−
exploitative mechanism and if the admission procedure adopted by private institution does not
satisfy all or any of the triple tests, it held that the admission procedure can be taken over by the
State substituting its process. This aspect was gauged in Modern Dental College and Research
Centre (supra) in a broader perspective considering prevailing situation of capitation fee and
education becoming saleable commodity. A decision has been taken to regulate admission in
professional colleges on national basis so as to wipe out the corruption and various evils from the
system. Even, the NEET has been made applicable to such premier institution like All India Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and so many others.
The decision has been taken considering the overall national scenario, there cannot be any
exemption, otherwise, there would be no end to such claims and multiple examinations. It would
not be possible to eradicate evils. We cannot restore overall derogatory situation which prevailed
before introduction of NEET. Still, there are several loopholes, which are to be plugged in the
admission procedure.
Unscrupulous practices are being adopted by private colleges of not admitting students sponsored
by centralised counselling committee.
The minority and private institutions have to admit students based on merit in the permissible
category, based on NEET as per procedure prescribed under the Act and Regulations.
39. In Faculty Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences v.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
62

Union of India and Ors., (2013) 11 SCC 246, concerning issue of reservation in super−speciality, the
Court opined:
“22. Although the matter has been argued at some length, the main issue raised
regarding reservation at the superspeciality level has already been considered in
Indra Sawhney case, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217, by a nine−Judge Bench of this Court.
Having regard to such decision, we are not inclined to take any view other than the
view expressed by the nine−Judge Bench on the issue. Apart from the decisions
rendered by this Court in Jagadish Saran case, (1980) 2 SCC 768 and Pradeep Jain
case, (1984) 3 SCC 654, the issue also fell for consideration in Preeti Srivastava case,
(1999) 7 SCC 120, which was also decided by a Bench of five Judges. While in
Jagadish Saran case, (1980) 2 SCC 768 and in Pradeep Jain case, (1984) 3 SCC 654, it
was categorically held that there could be no compromise with merit at the
superspeciality stage, the same sentiments were also expressed in Preeti Srivastava
case, (1999) 7 SCC 120, as well.
23. In Preeti Srivastava case, (1999) 7 SCC 120, the Constitution Bench had an occasion to consider
Regulation 27 of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
Regulations, 1967, whereby 20% of seats in every course of study in the institute was to be reserved
for candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or other categories of persons,
in accordance with the general rules of the Central Government promulgated from time to time. The
Constitution Bench came to the conclusion that Regulation 27 could not have any application at the
highest level of superspeciality as this would defeat the very object of imparting the best possible
training to selected meritorious candidates, who could contribute to the advancement of knowledge
in the field of medical research and its applications. Their Lordships ultimately went on to hold that
there could not be any type of relaxation at the superspeciality level.
24. In para 836 of the judgment in Indra Sawhney case, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 217, it was observed that
while the relevance and significance of merit at the stage of initial recruitment cannot be ignored, it
cannot also be ignored that the same idea of reservation implies selection of a less meritorious
person. It was also observed that at the same time such a price would have to be paid if the
constitutional promise of social justice was to be redeemed. However, after making such
suggestions, a note of caution was introduced in the very next paragraph in the light of Article 15 of
the Constitution. A distinction was, however, made with regard to the provisions of Article 16 and it
was held that Article 335 would be relevant and it would not be permissible not to prescribe any
minimum standard at all. Of course, the said observation was made in the context of admission to
medical colleges and reference was also made to the decision in State of M.P. v. Nivedita Jain, (1981)
4 SCC 296, where admission to medical courses was regulated by an entrance test. It was held that
in the matter of appointment of medical officers, the Government or the Public Service Commission
would not be entitled to say that there would not be minimum qualifying marks for Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates while prescribing a minimum for others. In the very next
paragraph, the nine− Judge Bench while discussing the provisions of Article 335 also observed that
there were certain services and posts where either on account of the nature of duties attached to
them or the level in the hierarchy at which they stood, merit alone counts. In such situations, it
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
63

cannot be advised to provide for reservations. In the paragraph following, the position was made
even more clear when Their Lordships observed that they were of the opinion that in certain services
in respect of certain posts, application of rule of reservation may not be advisable in regard to
various technical posts including posts in superspeciality in medicine, engineering and other
scientific and technical posts.” (emphasis supplied) The Court directed the Union of India to take
appropriate steps in accordance with views expressed in the case of Dr. Preeti Srivastava and Anr. v.
State of M.P. and Ors. (1999) 7 SCC 120.
40. In Re The Kerala Education Bill (supra), it was opined that minority could not ask for aid and
recognition of educational institution, when such institutions are recognized it would be open to
make the institution retaining its character as effective as an educational institution without
destroying its minority character for the purpose as enshrined in Article 30. The institution has to be
an effective vehicle of education for all concerned.
41. In Gandhi Faiz−e−am College, Shahjahanpur (supra), it was opined that regulation which
imposes restrictions is bad; but regulation which facilitates is good. We find that in Frank Anthony
Public School Employees' Association (supra) it has been observed that institution has to be an
effective vehicle of education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it. There
cannot be any complaint of invasion of the fundamental right to administer the institution when it
denies the members of its staff the opportunity to achieve the very object. The Court observed that
minorities have no right to maladminister. The notifications issued, amendment made to Section
10D of the Act of 1956 and regulations framed by MCI and similar provisions for dental courses
providing for NEET cannot be said to be impinging upon the rights of the minority and the
provisions of the Act and regulations framed by MCI under the Act of 1956, in DCI Act and
regulations are required to be observed by each and every institution. The regulatory measures
under the Act/ Regulations cannot be said to be averse to the interest of such institutions, and such
reasonable measures can be carved out. They do not impinge upon the rights of institutions
guaranteed under Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 25 and 30 of the Constitution of India.
42. In T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), this Court opined that State maintained or aided educational
institutions, whether established by the Government or the majority or a minority community
cannot deny admission to a citizen on the grounds only of religion, race, caste or language. While
considering the issue In Re The Kerala Education Bill (supra), it was observed that the right of the
private training colleges to admit students of their choice was severely restricted. It further observed
that the right under Article 30(1) is not so absolute as to prevent the State from making any
regulation whatsoever. The Government cannot be prevented from framing regulations that are in
the national interest. This Court observed that it is difficult to comprehend that right to the religious
or linguistic minorities are given by the Constitution, which would enable them to establish and
administer educational institutions in a manner to conflict with the other Parts of the Constitution.
There is no reason why conditions for the welfare of students and teachers should not be made, but
any law or rule or regulation that would put the educational institutions run by the minorities at a
disadvantage when compared to the institutions run by the others will have to be struck down. The
law of the land includes rules and regulations that must apply equally to the majority as well as
minority institutions. The minority institutions must be allowed to do what non−minority is
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
64

permitted to do. They have to comply with the conditions of recognition, which cannot be such as to
whittle down the right guaranteed under Article 30 of the Constitution.
43. In Brahmo Samaj Education Society (supra), it was held that State could impose necessary
conditions for proper maintenance of standards of education and to check maladministration.
44. On behalf of the appellants, it was submitted that individual autonomy is the concern of any
Government. There should not be interference to defeat the rights conferred by the Constitution.
Reliance has been placed on Gobind v. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra) in which this Court held:
“20. There can be no doubt that the makers of our Constitution wanted to ensure
conditions favourable to the pursuit of happiness. They certainly realized as
Brandeis, J. said in his dissent in Olmstead v. United States, 277 US 438, 471, the
significance of man’s spiritual nature, of his feelings and of his intellect and that only
a part of the pain, pleasure, satisfaction of life can be found in material things and
therefore they must be deemed to have conferred upon the individual as against the
Government a sphere where he should be let alone.
21. “The liberal individualist tradition has stressed, in particular, three personal
ideals, to each of which corresponds a range of ‘private affairs’. The first is the ideal of
personal relations; the second, the Lockean ideal of the politically free man in a
minimally regulated society; the third, the Kantian ideal of the morally autonomous
man, acting on principles that he accepts as rational.
[See Benn, “Privacy, Freedom and Respect for Persons” in J. Pennock & J. Chapman. Eds., Privacy,
Nomos XIII, 1, 15−16].”
23. Individual autonomy, perhaps the central concern of any system of limited Government, is
protected in part under our Constitution by explicit constitutional guarantees. In the application of
the Constitution our contemplation cannot only be of what has been but what may be. Time works
changes and brings into existence new conditions. Subtler and far reaching means of invading
privacy will make it possible to be heard in the street what is whispered in the closet. Yet, too broad
a definition of privacy raises serious questions about the propriety of judicial reliance on a right that
is not explicit in the Constitution. Of course, privacy primarily concerns the individual. It therefore
relates to and overlaps with the concept of liberty. The most serious advocate of privacy must
confess that there are serious problems of defining the essence and scope of the right. Privacy
interest in autonomy must also be placed in the context of other rights and values.
24. Any right to privacy must encompass and protect the personal intimacies of the home, the
family, marriage, motherhood, procreation and child rearing. This catalogue approach to the
question is obviously not as instructive as it does not give analytical picture of the distinctive
characteristics of the right of privacy. Perhaps, the only suggestion that can be offered as unifying
principle underlying the concept has been the assertion that a claimed right must be a fundamental
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
65

right implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.
25. Rights and freedoms of citizens are set forth in the Constitution in order to guarantee that the
individual, his personality, and those things stamped with his personality shall be free from official
interference except where a reasonable basis for intrusion exists. “Liberty against Government” a
phrase coined by Professor Corwin expresses this idea forcefully. In this sense, many of the
fundamental rights of citizens can be described as contributing to the right to privacy.
26. As Ely says:
There is nothing to prevent one from using the word ‘privacy’ to mean the freedom to
live one’s life without governmental interference. But the Court obviously does not so
use the term. Nor could it, for such a right is at stake in every case. [See The Wage of
Crying Wolf: A Comment on Roe v. Wade, 82 Yale LJ 920, 932].”
45. The reliance has also been placed on K.S. Puttaswamy and Anr.
v. Union of India and Ors., 2017 (10) SCC 1, the decision relating to privacy in which this Court held:
“351. The Constitution of any country reflects the aspirations and goals of the people
of that country voiced through the language of the few chosen individuals entrusted
with the responsibility of framing its Constitution. Such aspirations and goals depend
upon the history of that society. History invariably is a product of various forces
emanating from religious, economic, and political events1. The degree of refinement
of the Constitution depends upon the wisdom of the people entrusted with the
responsibility of framing the Constitution. The constitution is not merely a document
signed by 284 Members of the Constituent Assembly. It is a politically sacred
instrument created by men and women who risked lives and sacrificed their liberties
to fight alien rulers and secured freedom for our people, not only of their generation
but 1 However, various forced which go into the making of history are dynamic.
Those who are entrusted with the responsibility of the working of the Constitution
must necessarily keep track of the dynamics of such forces. Evolution of science and
growth of technology is another major factor in the modern world which is equally a
factor to be kept in mind to successfully work the Constitution.
generations to follow. The Constitution cannot be seen as a document written in ink to replace one
legal regime by another. It is a testament created for securing the goals professed in Preamble2. Part
III of the Constitution is incorporated to ensure the achievement of the objects contained in the
Preamble 3. "We the People" of this country are the intended beneficiaries4 of the Constitution. It
must be seen as a document written in the blood of innumerable martyrs of Jalianwala Bagh and the
like. Man is not a creature of the State. Life and liberty are not granted by the Constitution.
Constitution only stipulates the limitations on the power of the State to interfere with our life and
liberty. Law is essential to enjoy the fruits of liberty; it is not the source of liberty and emphatically
not the exclusive source.”
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
66

46. It was argued that certain colleges have produced doctors of renowned fame, and they are an
asset for India. There is no doubt about it that doctors of international fame have been produced by
various institutions. They are an asset not only for India but also for the entire humanity. They are
pioneers in various fields of medical science such as Oncology, Surgery, and other branches of
medical science. But, when it comes to the eradication of the malpractices that have crept into the
system, we have to take into consideration larger interest of the education countrywide. The NEET
has been 2 Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225.
“91. … Our Preamble outlines the objectives of the whole Constitution. It expresses “what we had
thought of dreamt for so long”.” (SCC p.323, para 91). 3 Kerala Education Bill, 1957, In re, AIR 1958
SC 956 “5. … To implement and fortify these supreme purposes set forth in the Preamble, Part III of
our Constitution has provided for us certain fundamental rights.” (AIR p. 965, para 5).
4 Bidi Supply Co. v. Union of India, AIR 1956 SC 479 “23. After all, for whose benefit was the
Constitution enacted? What was the point of making all this bother about fundamental rights? I am
clear that the Constitution is not for the exclusive benefit of governments and States; it is only for
lawyers and politicians and officials and those highly placed. It also exists for the common man, for
the poor and the humble, for those who have businesses at stake, for the “butcher, the baker and the
candlestick maker”. It lays down for this land “a rule of law” as understood in the free democracies
of the world. It constitutes India into a Sovereign Republic and guarantees in every page rights and
freedom to the side by side and consistent with the overriding power of the State to act for the
common good of all.” (AIR p.487, para 23) [For convenience, citations have been renumbered.]
prescribed by the Legislature in the larger public interest that has to prevail. We find the provisions
to be reasonable conditions of recognition/ affiliation are binding for the very existence of all such
institution whether they are run by majority or minority failing which they cannot exists and impart
education. The conditions are reasonable and cannot be said to be taking away any of the
constitutional rights of minority institutions, they are reasonable, fair and intended to bring
transparency in the professional education imparted by institutions. They are applicable for all
institutions alike minorities are not placed on a disadvantageous platform.
47. There is no doubt as to the concept of limited Government and least interference is welcomed,
but in which field and to what extent balancing with the larger public and national interest is
required. The individual autonomy, rights, and obligations are to be free from official interference
except where the rational basis for intrusion exists. The Constitution provides a limitation on the
power of the State to interfere with life, liberty, and rights, however, the concept of limited
government cannot be extended to a level when it defeats the very national interest. The maladies
with which professional education suffers in this country are writ large. The regulatory framework
created by the MCI/ DCI is concomitant of conditions, affiliation and recognition, and providing
central examination in the form of NEET cannot be said to be violative of the rights under Articles
19(1)(g) and
30. The regulatory framework is not restrictive, but caters to the effective enjoyment of the rights
conferred under the aforesaid provisions. The provisions qualify the doctrine of proportionality
considered in Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra).
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
67

What has been held therein for State level examination holds good for NEET also.
48. The prescription of NEET is definitely in order to improve the medical education, co−related to
the improvement of public health, thus, it is a step−in furtherance of the duty of the State enshrined
in the Directive Principles of the State Policy contained in Article 47 of the Constitution of India.
Similarly, Article 46 aims at promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, and other weaker sections. By prescription of one equivalence examination of
NEET, the interest of their merit is also equally protected and its aims of preventing various
malpractices, which crept into system and prevent economic exploitation by selling seats with which
malady the professional medical education system suffered.
Article 51A(j) deals with the duty to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement.
For that purpose, recognition of merit is necessary, and one has to be given a full opportunity in
pursuit of his/her aim. The prescription of NEET is to provide equal opportunity and level launching
platform to an individual to perform his duty as enshrined under Article 51A(j).
Thus, we find that there is no violation of the aforesaid provisions as argued by appellants, rather
action is in furtherance of the constitutional aims and directions to achieve intendment of Article
51A(j) and is in the national interest.
49. In Secretary, Malankara Syrian Catholic College v. T. Jose and Ors., (2007) 1 SCC 386, Court
considered T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), and held that all laws made by the State to regulate the
administration of educational institutions and grant of aid will apply to minority educational
institutions also, but dilution of right under Article 30 is not permissible. The right under Article 30
is not above the law. The regulations or conditions concerning the welfare of the students and
teachers should be made applicable to provide a proper academic atmosphere.
50. In P.A. Inamdar (supra), the court opined that activities of education are charitable. The
educational institutions, both of a non− minority and minority character, can be regulated and
controlled so that they do not indulge in selling seats of learning to make money.
They can be allowed to generate such funds as would be reasonably required to run the institute and
for its further growth. In P.A. Inamdar (supra), this Court noted the difference between professional
and non−professional educational institutions. It observed that professional educational institutions
constitute a class by themselves and are distinguished from educational institutions imparting non−
professional education. With respect to unaided minority educational institutions, Article 30 of the
Constitution does not come in the way of the State stepping in for the purpose of securing
transparency and recognition of merit in the matter of admissions, and the conditions of recognition
are binding on such institutions. In P.A. Inamdar (supra), the Court opined that the admissions
based on merit were in the national interest and strengthening the national welfare.
51. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society (supra), the Court held that minority institutions have
a right to admit students of their choice subject to reasonable restriction for the academic
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
68

qualification and the regulation, which will serve the interest of the students, can be imposed for
ensuring efficiency and fairness. Education is vital for the nation; it develops the ethos of the nation.
Regulations are necessary to see that there are no divisive or disintegrating forces in administration.
It observed that it is not reasonable to claim that minority institutions will have complete autonomy.
Some checks may be necessary and will serve the academic needs of the institution. A correlative
duty of good administration is attached to the right to administer educational institution. It was also
opined in Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society (supra) in paragraph 19 quoted above that the
State can prescribe regulations to ensure the excellence of the institution that does not militate
against the right of the minority to administer the institutions. Such Regulations are not restrictions
on the substance of the right, which is guaranteed; they secure the proper functioning of the
institution. The institution cannot be allowed to fall below the standards of excellence under the
guise of the exclusive right of the management. Minorities are as much part of the nation as the
majority, and anything that impinges upon national interest must necessarily in its ultimate
operation affect the interests of all.
52. It was further opined in Ahmedabad St. Xavier's College Society (supra) in paragraph 94 quoted
above that there are conditions of affiliation or recognition of an educational institution, it is
implicit in the request for grant thereof that the educational institution would abide by the
regulations which are made by the authority granting affiliation or recognition. When Government
and MCI/DCI or concerned Universities grant affiliation and recognition, the institutions are bound
by the conditions prescribed for affiliation and recognition. It has also been observed that
recognition or affiliation creates an interest in the university to ensure that the educational
institution is maintained for the purpose intended and any Regulation which will subserve or
advance that purpose will be reasonable and no minority institution established and administered
by a religious or linguistic minority can claim recognition or affiliation without submitting to those
regulations.
53. In view of the law laid down in T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra), it is apparent that
NEET/common entrance test is a devise to standardise and computing equivalence between
different kinds of qualifications. It does not interfere with the rights of the unaided minority
institutions as it has been imposed in national interest considering the malpractices of granting
illegal admission by virtually selling the seats in derogation to rights of meritorious students. The
charitable activity of education became a saleable commodity and prerogative of wealthy persons
and poor students were forced to get education funded from Banks making it difficult for them to
come out of tentacular octave of interest. They are exploited in bud before they bloom into flower.
The ill−reputation developed by MCI forced to change its entire structure. The national interest
requires further improvement in the system to eradicate evils from the system. The situation is still
grim and require to be dealt with firm hand and steely determination.
54. In Dr. Preeti Srivastava and Anr. v. State of M.P. and Ors. (supra), it was opined that at super
speciality level there cannot be any reservation or lowering of the minimum qualifying marks. In
Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra), considering various malpractices, it was
observed that education is being used as exploitative financial device. Education is not a commodity
to be purchased by money power and deserving one as per merit cannot be deprived of the right to
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
69

obtain it. The State cannot remain a mute spectator, and it must step in to prevent exploitation.
55. Thus, it is apparent that the provisions in question which have been incorporated in the Act
relating to Medical/Dental education, the Government, MCI and DCI cannot be said to be an
invasion of the fundamental rights. The intendment is to ensure fairness in the selection,
recognition of merit, and the interests of the students. In the national interest, educational
institutions are basically for a charitable purpose. By and large, at present education is devoid of its
real character of charity, it has become a commodity. To weed out evils from the system, which were
eating away fairness in admission process, defeating merit and aspiration of the common incumbent
with no means, the State has the right to frame regulatory regime for aided/ unaided minority/
private institutions as mandated by Directives Principles, Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. The
first step has been taken to weed out the evils from the system, and it would not be in the national
interest to step back considering the overall scenario. If we revert to the old system, posterity is not
going to forgive us. Still, complaints are galore that merit is being ignored by private institutions;
there is still a flood of litigation. It seems that unfettered by a large number of regulatory measures,
unscrupulous methods and malpractices are yet being adopted. Building the nation is the main
aspect of education, which could not be ignored and overlooked. They have to cater to national
interest first, then their interest, more so, when such conditions can be prescribed for recognition,
particularly in the matter of professional education.
56. In St. Stephen's College v. University of Delhi (supra), it was held that there has to be balancing
of interest of rights of minorities. It was observed that 50% of the annual admission has to be given
to the members of communities other than the minority community on the basis of merit.
Regulations that serve the interest in standards of education amongst the recognised institutions
could validly be made.
Such general patterns and standards are the need, and such regulation shall not have the effect of
depriving the right of minorities to educate their children in their own institution.
57. The learned counsel argued that it is open to some of the institutions to impose higher standards
of merit. Firstly, conditions of affiliation are binding apart from that, we find that when it comes to
national standards and the objects sought to be achieved by NEET, to conduct individual
examinations by some institutions cannot be permitted. The system is not yet out of clutches of
unscrupulous devices and dubious means are adopted to defeat merit, the interest of education
would further suffer and very purpose of centralised examination would be defeated. It is not
possible to prescribe further examination over and above NEET that cannot be said to be workable,
no exemption can be granted from NEET, considering the objective with which it has been
introduced. We find that the uniform Entrance Examination cannot be said to be unreasonable
regulatory framework.
Considering the terms and conditions for affiliation and recognition for professional medical and
such other professional courses are binding, and no relaxation can be permitted in the conditions.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
70

58. Thus, we are of the opinion that rights under Articles 19(1)(g) and 30 read with Articles 25, 26
and 29(1) of the Constitution of India do not come in the way of securing transparency and
recognition of merits in the matter of admissions. It is open to regulating the course of study,
qualifications for ensuring educational standards. It is open to imposing reasonable restrictions in
the national and public interest.
The rights under Article 19(1)(g) are not absolute and are subject to reasonable restriction in the
interest of the student's community to promote merit, recognition of excellence, and to curb the
malpractices.
Uniform Entrance Test qualifies the test of proportionality and is reasonable. The same is intended
to check several maladies which crept into medical education, to prevent capitation fee by admitting
students which are lower in merit and to prevent exploitation, profiteering, and commercialisation
of education. The institution has to be a capable vehicle of education. The minority institutions are
equally bound to comply with the conditions imposed under the relevant Acts and Regulations to
enjoy affiliation and recognition, which apply to all institutions. In case they have to impart
education, they are bound to comply with the conditions which are equally applicable to all. The
regulations are necessary, and they are not divisive or disintegrative. Such regulatory measures
enable institutions to administer them efficiently. There is no right given to maladminister the
education derogatory to the national interest. The quality of medical education is imperative to sub−
serve the national interest, and the merit cannot be compromised. The Government has the right for
providing regulatory measures that are in the national interest, more so in view of Article 19(6) of
the Constitution of India.
59. The rights of the religious or linguistic minorities under Article 30 are not in conflict with other
parts of the Constitution. Balancing the rights is constitutional intendment in the national and more
enormous public interest. Regulatory measures cannot be said to be exceeding the concept of
limited governance. The regulatory measures in question are for the improvement of the public
health and is a step, in furtherance of the directive principles enshrined in Articles 47 and 51(A)(j)
and enable the individual by providing full opportunity in pursuance of his objective to excel in his
pursuit. The rights to administer an institution under Article 30 of the Constitution are not above
the law and other Constitutional provisions. Reasonable regulatory measures can be provided
without violating such rights available under Article 30 of the Constitution to administer an
institution. Professional educational institutions constitute a class by themselves. Specific measures
to make the administration of such institutions transparent can be imposed. The rights available
under Article 30 are not violated by provisions carved out in Section 10D of the MCI Act and the
Dentists Act and Regulations framed by MCI/DCI. The regulatory measures are intended for the
proper functioning of institutions and to ensure that the standard of education is maintained and
does not fall low under the guise of an exclusive right of management to the extent of
maladministration. The regulatory measures by prescribing NEET is to bring the education within
the realm of charity which character it has lost. It intends to weed out evils from the system and
various malpractices which decayed the system. The regulatory measures in no way interfere with
the rights to administer the institution by the religious or linguistic minorities.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
71

60. Resultantly, we hold that there is no violation of the rights of the unaided/aided minority to
administer institutions under Articles 19(1)
(g) and 30 read with Articles 25, 26 and 29(1) of the Constitution of India by prescribing the
uniform examination of NEET for admissions in the graduate and postgraduate professional courses
of medical as well as dental science. The provisions of the Act and regulation cannot be said to be
ultra vires or taking away the rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India under Article 30(1)
read with Articles 19(1)(g), 14, 25, 26 and 29(1). Accordingly, the transferred cases, appeal, and writ
petitions are disposed of.
No costs.
................................J. [ARUN MISHRA] ................................J. [VINEET SARAN]
................................J. [M.R. SHAH] NEW DELHI;
APRIL 29, 2020.
Christian Medical College Vellore vs Union Of India on 29 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50702186/
72
