Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28
October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5360, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
791
Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, Sanjay Kishan Kaul
                                                                                  Report
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL No. 12202 of 2018
                         DHARMENDRA KUMAR SINGH                            …Appellant
                                                       Versus
                         THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.               …Respondents
                         With
                         Civil Appeal No.11368/2018
                         Civil Appeal No.5257/2019
                         Civil Appeal No.5093/2019
                         Civil Appeal No.7002/2019
                                                 JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1. An ideological battle often rages between preservation of environment and economic
development. Mining activity and the manner in which it is carried on has had its proponents and
opponents. Its necessity as an input for economic development is recognised but mining activity
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
1

throughout our country for minerals or sands has had a troubled history on account of large-scale
violations. This has also resulted in a ban on mining activity in certain areas at certain times – not
the ideal method, but leaving little option open because of the rampant misuse of the licences to
mine. The present litigation, in a sense, flows from the concern to regulate mining activity in
eco-sensitive areas. The Factual Development:
2. The fact flow of the present case shows that what we are faced with today has its seeds in prior
litigation and orders passed in the past in the interest of ecology, yet some persons who had
succeeded in the initial battle to carry out mining activity are faced with the consequences of orders
passed in other litigations. It is this conundrum, which would have to be resolved by this Court.
3. Mining leases granted to projects in the mineral rich district of Sonbhadra, carved out of the
district Mirzapur in the State of Uttar Pradesh (for short ‘State of UP’) in 1989 is the starting point.
The All India Kaimur People’s Front (for short ‘AIKPF’) filed an application before the National
Green Tribunal, New Delhi (for short ‘NGT’), being O.A. No.429/2016, inter alia seeking directions
for immediate prohibition of alleged illegal mining in the vicinity of Kaimur Wildlife Sanctuary
located in Village Billi Markundi in Sonbhadra District. The area being ecologically sensitive and
preservation of wildlife being the objective, the NGT issued notices in the matter.
4. In pursuance of this initial development, a Notification dated 20.3.2017 was issued by the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (for short ‘MoEFCC’) declaring the “area in
question” as an Eco-Sensitive Zone (for short ‘ESZ’) under sub-section (1) and clauses (v) and (xiv)
of sub-section(2) and (3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the
‘EPA’).
5. The State of UP set out the factual position about the grant of leases before the NGT in an affidavit
filed in this behalf. Thirty-three leases were stated to be operational outside ESZ. The NGT called
upon the State of UP to explain the position of these leases in view of the order it had passed on
4.5.2016 in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union of India and Ors.1 by way of which the NGT
had directed the State of UP to cancel all mining leases and all other non-forestry activities on the
areas notified under Section 4 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Forest
Act’). In order to appreciate the ramifications, Section 4 of the Forest Act is extracted hereinunder:
“4. Notification by State Government.—(1) Whenever it has been decided to
constitute any land a reserved forest, the State Government shall issue a notification
in the Official Gazette—
(a) declaring that it has been decided to constitute such land a reserved forest;
(b) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such land; and
(c) appointing an officer (hereinafter called “the Forest Settlement-
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
2

officer”) to inquire into and determine the existence, nature and extent of any rights alleged to exist
in favour of any person in or over any land comprised within such limits or in or over any
forest-produce, and to deal with the same as provided in this Chapter.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (b), it shall be sufficient to describe the limits of the forest
by roads, rivers, ridges or other well-known or readily intelligible boundaries.
1 In M.A. No. 1166 and 1164 of 2015 decided on 4.5.2016 (2) The officer appointed under clause (c)
of sub-section (1) shall ordinarily be a person not holding any forest-office except that of Forest
Settlement-officer.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent the State Government from appointing any number of
officers not exceeding three, not more than one of whom shall be a person holding any forest-office
except as aforesaid, to perform the duties of a Forest Settlement- officer under this Act.” The
purport of the Notification is, thus, to specify as to what lies within the limits of reserved forest area.
6. The NGT in the said proceedings noted the admission of the State of UP that some active leases
still remained in force on lands which were covered under the Notification issued under Section 4 of
the Forest Act for which the corresponding notification under Section 20 of the Forest Act had still
not been issued. Section 20 of the Forest Act reads as under:
“20. Notification declaring forest reserved.—(1) When the following events have
occurred, namely:—
(a) the period fixed under section 6 for preferring claims have elapsed and all claims
(if any) made under that section or section 9 have been disposed of by the Forest
Settlement-officer;
(b) if any such claims have been made, the period limited by section 17 for appealing
from the orders passed on such claims has elapsed, and all appeals (if any) presented
within such period have been disposed of by the appellate officer or Court; and
(c) all lands (if any) to be included in the proposed forest, which the Forest
Settlement-officer has, under section 11, elected to acquire under the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), have become vested in the Government under
section 16 of that Act, the State Government shall publish a notification in the Official
Gazette, specifying definitely, according to boundary-marks erected or otherwise, the
limits of the forest which is to be reserved, and declaring the same to be reserved
from a date fixed by the notification.
(2) From the date so fixed such forest shall be deemed to be a reserved forest.” Thus,
what had not been done was that the consequences of the area falling in the reserved
forest area in terms of Section 4 Notification did not follow a Notification under
Section 20 of the Forest Act. The NGT, thus, directed vide order dated 13.7.2018 that
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
3

all leases under Section 4 area be prohibited by the State of UP forthwith. The review
filed by the State of UP came to be dismissed vide order dated 29.8.2018.
We may note at this stage that what is impugned is the aforesaid order dated 13.7.2018 by the
appellants before us, except for appellants in C.A. No. 5093/2019 where order dated 25.3.2019 of
the NGT has been impugned. However, this order was also decided in terms of the main impugned
order dated 13.7.2018
7. The fallacy, in our view, which occurred in the proceedings before the NGT was that leaseholders
of the leases were not made parties, not even in a representative capacity, yet, they suffered the
consequences of the aforesaid order inasmuch as the District Magistrate (for short ‘DM’),
Sonbhadra, issued administrative orders (on 29.8.2018 and 5.2.2019) in pursuance of the aforesaid
order of the NGT prohibiting mining and transportation of gettis/boulders till the next order. This
effectively stopped the mining activity. The appellants naturally being aggrieved filed appeals before
this Court as being the affected parties under Section 22 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘NGT Act’) arraying the State of UP, its concerned departments and
officers, MoEFCC, as well as AIKPF (the original petitioners before the NGT) as respondents. The
appeals, inter alia, are predicated on the respective lands and corresponding leases being actually
excluded from the purview of the Notification issued under Section 4 of the Forest Act, the lands in
question being ‘pahadh lands’, i.e., uncultivable waste lands belonging to the Revenue Department.
Since there are different appeals and different dates involved, for clarity of facts, we are setting forth
below the particulars of the lease details and the suspension orders of the respective appellants as
under:
     Civil Appeals         Material               Village   Lease        Date    of
                                                            Duration     Suspensio
                                                                         n Order
1.   CA No.12202/2018                                       29.6.2009
                      Dolostone                   Billi     to           29.8.2018
     Dharmendra Kumar (Boulder)/Gitti             Markund   28.6.2019
     Singh                                        i
2.   CA No.11368/2018                                       17.2.2011
                      Dolostone                   Billi     to           29.8.2018
     Qaiser Shikoh    (Boulder)/Gitti             Markund   16.2.2021
                                                  i
3.   CA No.5257/2019                                        7.7.2009 to
                                                            6.7.2019
     Dev Prakash           Small                  Billi     (extended   29.8.2018
                           stone/Gitti/Doloston   Markund   to
                           e                      i         10.3.2020)
                                                            14.7.2009
     Govind Agarwal                                         to           29.8.2018
                           Small                  Billi     13.7.2019
                           stone/Gitti/Boulder/   Markund   (extended
                           Dolostone              i         to
                                                            17.3.2020)
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
4

                                                            7.12.2008
     Bhanu Prakash                                          to           29.8.2018
                           Small                  Billi     6.12.2018
                           stone/Gitti/Boulder/   Markund   (extended
                           Dolostone              i         to
                                                            10.8.2019)
     Sai Ram Enterprises
     Neelkanth   Mining Building        stone Billi         New lease
     (the only claim in (dolostone), Khanda, Markund        through e-
     this Civil Appeal Grit, Boulder, etc.    i             tender     5.2.2019
     since other lease                                      process
     periods    have      not                             11.12.2018
     started)                                             to
                                                          10.12.2028
     Gyanendra Tripathi
     C.S.
     Infrasconstruction
     Amit Enterprises
5.   CA No.7002/2019                                      From
                                                          3.3.2007 to
     Krishnaanand Singh         Gitti/boulder   Billi     02.03.2017 29.8.2018
                                                Markund
                                                i
Prior Litigations:
8. In order to appreciate the contention of the appellants, it would be apposite to trace out two lines
of legal developments, which have arisen since the issuance of Notification under Section 4 of the
Forest Act wherein lies the genesis of the dispute. The first line of legal development arose from
Notification No. 3723/14-b-4(67)69 dated 5.11.1969 issued by the State of UP under Section 4 of the
Forest Act. The Notification included in its compass large tracts of land in Village Billi Markundi
declaring that it has been decided to constitute such land as reserved forest. The corresponding
Notification under Section 20 of the Forest Act was to be issued. However, the 1969 Notification
came under scrutiny of this Court upon a letter being received from the Banwasi Seva Ashram
operating in Sonbhadra District highlighting the plight of the Adivasis living in the area and their
related rights with respect to the land. The adjudication resulted in a judgment being pronounced on
20.11.1986 in Banwasi Seva Ashram v. State of U.P & Ors.2 wherein a slew of directions were passed
relating, inter alia to the land which had been notified under Section 4 of the Forest Act but where
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
5

no subsequent notification had been issued under Section 20 of that Act. It was directed that the
Forest Settlement Officer (for short ‘FSO’) shall scrutinize all claims and thereafter the matter be
placed before the Additional District Judge (for short ‘ADJ’) as a suo moto appeal. The State
Government was required to give effect reserving such lands under Section 20 of the Forest Act
which were found to be covered under Section 4 of the Forest Act. Claims were filed before the FSO
(including those of the predecessors of the appellants herein) to be excluded from Section 4
Notification and they succeeded in the same. A decision was to be taken by the ADJ as the appellate
authority and the order passed by the said authority on 30.9.1994 confirmed the findings of the
FSO. The Forest Department thereafter filed a large number of review petitions 2 (1986) 4 SCC 753
against that order, which came to be allowed, albeit after a period of eight (8) years, in terms of the
order dated 31.5.2003. Thus, the appellants/predecessors of appellants before us (who were affected
parties in those proceedings) approached the High Court by way of different writ petitions and all
these petitions came to be allowed in terms of the order in Writ Petition No.29546/2003 titled Ved
Prakash Garg & Ors. v. Additional District Judge, which itself was deciding the grievance of a large
number of claimants similarly placed as the appellants herein against the order dated 31.5.2003.
The view adopted was predicated on the stand of the State of UP itself having taken a decision that
the land in question be treated as land belonging to the Revenue Department of the State and on
which the mining operations should be permitted. A direction was issued that the application for
renewal of mining leases be considered and the order dated 31.5.2003 was set aside. An SLP against
this order came to be dismissed by this Court on 22.11.2018, in SLP (C) (Diary) No. 33675 of 2018.
The proceedings in respect of exclusion of the subject land in question from the purview of Section 4
of the Forest Act, thus, attained finality.
9. The second line of litigation pertains to events of 1992 when the Uttar Pradesh State Cement
Corporation (for short ‘UPSCCL’) became a sick industry and was put to auction where M/s
Jayprakash Associates Limited (for short ‘JAL’) emerged as the highest bidders. The significance of
this event is that it culminated in the order in the T.N. Godavarman case dated 4.5.2016, on which
considerable reliance has been placed in the impugned order before us.3 The assets purchased by
JAL included a mining lease of 2168 hectares of area of which some portions were included within
Section 4 Notification area. Claims were initiated by JAL praying for exclusion of the said lands
from Section 4 Notification. This matter came up to this Court, when in 2010 it was transferred to
the NGT. The NGT passed a detailed judgment in this very matter on 4.5.2016 with directions, inter
alia to the State of UP to cancel all mining leases whether fresh or renewed and all other
non-forestry activities on the Section 4 lands and to issue a notification under Section 20
immediately. The effect of these directions was that the finality of the settlement proceedings
concluded in terms of Banwasi Seva Ashram4 case was reiterated and urgency to carry out the
process under Section 4 and Section 20 of the Forest Act was emphasised.
3 (supra) 4 (supra)
10. The significance of the aforesaid two rounds of litigation assumes importance in view of the
reliance placed on them in the impugned order but also by the appellants to buttress their claim that
the procedure with regard to the leases in their favour came to be settled in terms thereof. The
Current Litigation:
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
6

11. We now turn to the present civil appeals in which notices were issued and the matters were
clubbed. In the counter affidavit dated 23.4.2019 filed by the State of UP the factual progression
discussed aforesaid in respect of the land excluded from the purview of Section 4 was set out. The
State of UP also sought permission of the Court with respect to issuance of the notification under
Section 20 for those lands, which did come under Section 4 of the Forest Act. The question was
crystallised in the counter affidavit as that if the notification under Section 20 had not been issued
and certain parts of the lands covered under the notification under Section 4 had been deleted by
the competent authorities (i.e., the FSO, thereafter ADJ, and finally the High Court) whether such
deleted lands shall be treated as non-forest lands without issuance of notification under Section 20
of the Forest Act. As is the normal working, a series of orders had to be passed by this Court due to
delay on behalf of the State of UP and it is only on 15.7.2020 that this Court noted that the Section
20 notification had finally been issued on 15.6.2020. Thus, it was noted by this Court on that date
that the only question now remaining to be determined was with regard to the extension of leases
for the period for which the mining leases of the appellants were not permitted to operate and
sought the assistance/view of the State of UP on this aspect.
12. The State respondents filed an additional affidavit dated 6.8.2020 setting forth its stand. It was
contended by the State of UP that no permission for mining can be granted for the obstructed period
as there does not exist any provision for grant of such permission for mining in case of disruption of
mining operations under the Uttar Pradesh Mining Minerals (Concession) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Mining Rules’).5 On 10.8.2020 while noticing the aforesaid and upon a query
from the Court, the State of UP conceded that it was willing to refund the proportionate amount of
the lease money, for which period the leases have not been permitted to operate. This was objected
to by the 5 Framed under Section 15 of the Mines and Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957 appellants. Thus, the Court crystallised the issue to be determined and the only aspect to be
examined by this Court, as whether in view of judicial pronouncements the appropriate order to
pass would be for refund of the lease amount for the period it was not permitted to operate, or
whether the leases are liable to be renewed for the period of obstructed time. It is within the
contours of the aforesaid proposition that learned counsel for the parties have taken their stand,
both in terms of the written synopses and by making submissions in the Court.
The Stand of the State of UP:
13. The State of UP crystallised the factual issue by setting out that the total number
of permitted operational mining leases prior to the impugned order in the district in
question were 82 – 64 leases in Village Billi Markundi and only 29 of such leases
were covered by the impugned order. The impugned order resulted in 41 leases
ceasing to exist/being banned and 29 leases out of them have been covered by
Section 20 notification. The notification had resulted in 5 out of 29 leases falling
within the radices of 100 metres of the forest land and out of the remaining 24 leases,
12 have expired and 12 subsist. We are concerned with the latter. The consequence of
the impugned order and the order of the DM was that the mining operations had
been obstructed pursuant to impugned order dated 13.7.2018 till the issuance of the
notification under Section 20 of the Forest Act. The State of UP contended that it had
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
7

only complied with the impugned order and if these mining leases are now extended
there would be consequences flowing to the State of UP, on account of judicial orders.
We may notice that some of the leases expired during the obstructed period while
other leases have continued and thus in the latter cases the issue would only be to
further extend the lease for the obstructed period while in case of the earlier situation
permission would have to be given to mine for an extended period relatable to the
obstructed period. The delay on the part of the State of UP in issuance of the Section
20 notification has been placed at the door of an apprehension that it should not be
construed as violative of the orders passed in Banwasi Seva Ashram6 case.
14. In what manner should such cases be dealt with, judicial opinions expressed in
this behalf have been sought to be referred to as a consistent view of the Allahabad
High Court in this behalf, being the local court dealing with the aspect of mining
leases in the cases:
6 (supra) a. Sukhan Singh v. State of UP & Ors.7 an opinion was rendered that the mere filing of an
application either for the grant of a lease or for the renewal of a lease does not confer a vested right
for the grant or renewal of a lease and, an application has to be disposed of on the basis of the rules
as they stand on the date of the disposal of the application. This was in the context of the
applicability of G.O. dated 31.05.2012 to pending applications seeking a fresh lease or for renewal of
a lease under Chapter II of the Mining Rules as decided in Nar Narain Mishra v. The State of UP and
Ors.8 (This view received the imprimatur of the Supreme Court in Sulekhan Singh & Company and
Ors. V. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.9).
b. In Mohammad Yunus Hasan v. State of UP & Ors.10 Rule 68 of the Mining Rules dealing with the
relaxation of applicability of the Mining Rules by the State Government was interpreted to
determine the contours of the power which could be exercised in terms of the said Rule. Rule 68
reads as under:
7(2015) 2 All LJ 619 8 2013 SCCOnline All 13919 9 (2016) 4 SCC 663 10 (2016) 4 All
LJ 4 “68. Relaxation of rules in special cases.- The State Government may, if it is of
opinion that in the interest of mineral development it is necessary so to do, by order
in writing and for reasons to be recorded authorised in any case the grant of any
mining lease or the working of any mine for, the purpose of winning any minerals on
terms and conditions different from those laid down in these rules.” The aspect of
‘interests of mineral development’ was emphasised and it was opined that the Rule
does not confer a power on the State to extend a lease beyond the contracted period
without adhering to the procedure under Chapter II11 and IV12 of the Mining Rules.
The conclusion reached was that this Rule 68 could not be an aid to extend the term
of an expired lease to compensate any loss caused to such leaseholder, if their lease
has been terminated or curtailed during the subsistence period due to an order of the
competent authority. Moreover, the right to an extension of lease must either flow
from a statutory provision or from the terms of the lease between the concerned
parties.
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
8

c. In Vijay Kumar Dwivedi v. State of Uttar Pradesh13 the validity of permission granted by the State
Government to 11 Grant of Mining Lease.
12 Auction Lease.
13 (2016) 4 All LJ 690 leaseholders to continue with the excavation for the period during which they
were obstructed/restrained from carrying out such activities during the subsistence of their leases
due to orders of the High Court or of competent authorities was examined. Relying upon the
observations in Mohammad Yunus Hasan14 case, the Allahabad High Court directed that no person
shall be permitted to excavate minor minerals on the basis of lease deeds or permission granted
subsequent to G.O. dated 31.5.2012 under the garb of renewal of an expired lease, extension of lease,
grant of a fresh lease, or permission to excavate during the obstructed period. Additionally, no Form
MM-11 shall be issued in favour of any person with an expired lease or an order be granted
subsequent to 31.5.2012 in their favour for excavation of minor minerals in the name of renewal of
lease, extension of term of expired lease, or permission for the obstructed period on the plea that a
valid lease was granted but excavation could not be carried for some days during the subsistence
period due to orders of the High Court/competent authorities. This was so as the G.O. dated 14
(supra) 31.5.2012 recorded a decision, which had been taken in the interests of transparency and
fair competition, to grant leases through the E-tendering system by inviting tenders under Chapter
IV of the Mining Rules.
15. In the conspectus of the aforesaid facts and judicial pronouncements, the developments which
have taken place post this situation were set out. The State of UP issued a New Mining Policy on
12.6.2017. In terms of this policy there is no provision for grant of extension of time for obstructed
period of mining lease and all mining leases were to be permitted by e-tendering or e-auction alone.
16. It is also contended before us on behalf of the State of UP by learned senior counsel, Mr. V.
Shekhar that there was no legal provision/rule or any provision in the respective lease deeds to pay
damages in case of disruption of mining leases and the consequences of such disruption are set out
in Rule 40(h) of the Mining Rules, which reads as under:
“40. Liberties, powers and privileges.— (h) In the event of disruption of mining
operation in the lease area owing to any special circumstances, the District
Magistrate with the prior approval of the State Government shall adjust the amount
equivalent to the installment payable during the disrupted period, online against the
forthcoming installment.” Thus, in the event of disruption of mining operations in
the leased areas owing to any special circumstances, the DM, with the prior approval
of the State Government shall adjust the amount equivalent to the installment
payable during the disrupted period against the forthcoming installment. Thus, it was
contended that the State of UP is only liable to refund (i) any security deposit, or (ii)
advance royalties paid to it.
17. It was emphasised that in view of the judicial pronouncement in Vijay Kumar Dwivedi15 case it is
clear that after 31.5.2012, no permission for mining can be granted to excavate during the
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
9

obstructed period. In the absence of any provision under the Mining Rules for grant of extension of
expired mining lease or renewal of the same for the obstructed period in case of disruption to
mining operation, any extension of lease was contended to be unsustainable in law.
15 (supra)
18. The sequitur to G.O. dated 31.5.2012 was pleaded to have been explained in the Nar Narain
Mishra case16 where the Allahabad High Court observed that any submission that ‘imarti patthar or
building stone’ is not covered by the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 cannot be accepted. This was predicated
on the reasoning that the G.O. did not confine itself to the word ‘boulder’ found in riverbeds as the
same can be used for minerals found in riverbeds as well as those found in ‘in situ rock deposit’. This
was also stated to be evident from Schedule I and II of the Mining Rules which make it clear that the
word ‘boulder’ is included in the heading of ‘building stone’ as well as found in a mixed form in the
riverbed. Item 5 of Schedule I and Item 4 of Schedule II both use the word ‘boulder’ as building
stones as well as when found in a mixed form in riverbeds.
19. The High Court, thus, passed directions rejecting the prayers made for consideration of
applications for renewal of mining leases which were pending on 31.5.2012 and applications for
grant of fresh leases under Chapter II of the Mining Rules which were also pending on the same day.
16 (supra) An SLP preferred against this judgment was dismissed on 4.3.2016. Not only that, it was
emphasized that the Supreme Court itself in the Sulekhan Singh17 case approved of the decision in
Nar Narain Mishra18 case.
20. The concluding argument was that the aforesaid position leaves no manner of doubt that the
appellants were not entitled to any extension or renewal of their old leases and at the most are
entitled to refund of their respective lease amounts for the period for which the leases were not
permitted to operate, an aspect which has already been conceded on behalf of the State Government
in the proceedings dated 10.8.2020. Thus, the permission sought by the appellants for operating the
expired mining lease for the obstructed period was strongly opposed, leaving it for the appellants to
file an application under Rule 40(h) if the amount is to be refunded or adjusted.
21. We may note the supporting arguments of AIKPF qua the impugned order of the NGT, which
drew our attention to the prohibition of mining in ESZ declared around the Kaimur National Park
and that not 17 (supra) 18 (supra) being challenged by the appellants and hence the consequences of
mining activity for the obstructed period did not facilitate extension of leases. The aspect arising
from the GO dated 31.5.2012 and the contentions of the State Government in that behalf was also
sought to be supported by the observations of the Supreme Court in Deepak Kumar and Ors. v. State
of Haryana and Ors.19 which in turn had extracted the recommendations of Ministry of
Environment and Forest regarding the definition of the term ‘minor mineral’, which it said meant
building stone, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for prescribed purposes
and any other material which the Central Government may, by notification declare to be a minor
mineral.20 The Appellants’ Case:
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
10

22. The contentions of the appellants, on the other hand, led by learned senior
counsel, Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. S.P. Singh are predicated on the settlement of
the controversy in question in the aforementioned prior rounds of litigation which
came up right to this Court and the appellants had succeeded in the same. The land
for which mining leases were
19 (2012) 4 SCC 629 20 Section 3(e) in The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957 granted to the appellants were excluded from the purview of the Section 4 notification in
pursuance of the settlement proceedings concluded as per directions in Banwasi Seva Ashram21
case. These settlement proceedings are pleaded to have been ignored while passing the impugned
order and that too without notice to the appellants.
23. The appellants plead that suspension of the mining leases is not on account of any factor
attributable to them, i.e., there is no illegal mining or any such factor, which may weigh against the
appellants. The delay in issuance of the Section 20 notification was solely because of the delayed
State action, and the issue was finalised only on 15.6.2020 whereby the land categorised as revenue
land was excluded from the purview of forest land. The appellants alleged to have suffered for no
fault of theirs but on account of the litigation initiated behind their back and the inaction of the
State. This was, it was contended, a “third chapter of litigation” on the very question of the
consequences of Section 4 notification – the first round in pursuance of the Banwasi Seva Ashram22
case right up to this Court and then the exclusion claim of JAL which culminated in the order 21
(supra) 22 (supra) of the Tribunal dated 4.5.2016, which it was contended, would have no bearing
on their leases.
24. The plea of the State of non-grant of extension of leases is stated to be contrary to record as that
power has been exercised in the past under Rule 68 of the Mining Rules. Illustratively, two
judgments have been referred to where such extension of lease is recognised: J.P. Yadav v. Kanhaiya
Singh & Ors.23 and Jagdish Prasad Nishad v. State of UP & Ors.24 In J.P. Yadav, the Apex Court
observed that Rule 68 confers upon the State the powers to extend lease for the obstructed period
and subsequently in Jagdish Prasad Nishad, the High Court reiterated that any different view taken
with respect to Rule 68 and the powers it confers on the State would be in violation of the
observations of the Supreme Court in J.P. Yadav. Rule 68, it was urged, is comprehensive and
complete in all respects and in the absence of any specific legislation recourse can be had to the said
Rule.
25. On a linked aspect, keeping in mind the predicament that the appellants find themselves in on
account of Court orders, learned counsel 24 (2015) 128 RD 150 relied upon the observations in Beg
Raj Singh v. State of UP & Ors.25 for the proposition that the ordinary rule is that the Court should
try to place the successful party in the same position which they had been in, if the wrong
complained against them would not have been done to them. Moreover, it was argued that, it is a
well-settled proposition of law that an act of the Court shall prejudice no one and the same is
reflected in the maxim, ‘Actus curiae neminem gravabit’. The factual matrix dealt with the same
issue of extension of mining leases and in pursuance of the judgment, the State of UP had issued a
notification dated 31.7.2014 to all DMs stating that the judgment makes it clear that wherever no
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
11

third party interest had been created, the area is vacant and it is established that the leaseholder has
been prevented from operating its mining lease for any period for no fault attributable to them, then
the extension of mining lease for the corresponding period can be provided. The case of the
appellants is submitted to squarely fall within the aforesaid compass.
26. The appellants plead that the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 and for that matter the New Mining Policy of
2017 will have no bearing as that aspect stands elucidated vis-à-vis the judgment in M/s.
Peethambra Granite 25 (2003) 1 SCC 726 Pvt. Ltd. v. State of UP & Ors.26 by the High Court
Judicature at Allahabad. In this case, the directions issued in Vijay Kumar Dwivedi27 case have been
held to have no application to granite building stone (in situ rock) as the mineral was not covered by
the G.O. dated 31.5.2012. This aspect is stated to have been clarified by the subsequent G.O. dated
26.2.2013 and the G.O. dated 22.10.2014, the latter, in fact, cancelled the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 as
also the G.O. dated 26.2.2013. Since 31.5.2012 itself, a total of 35 mining leases are stated to have
been granted or renewed in District Sonbhadra.
27. We may add that Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel, advanced the additional plea of G.O.
dated 31.5.2012 not being applicable on account of the lease being granted prior to that date in 2012.
28. On the aspect on which a Court query was posed, i.e., if this Court is not agreeable to renew the
leases, what could be the method of grant of compensation, calculations have been filed by the
appellants. Losses are stated to include idling of machinery and other infrastructure, the 26 WRIT -
C No. - 30066 of 2017 decided on 18.2.2020 27 (supra) payment of salaries, providing staff
accommodation as also the costs of litigation as part of calculation of compensation.
29. We may note in the end that one of the pleas advanced was that the State Government itself had
not been satisfied with the impugned order and had preferred Civil Appeal Nos.8804-8805/2019.
However, when this fact was pointed out to Mr. V. Shekhar, learned senior counsel, on instructions,
sought to withdraw the appeal stating that whatever be the grievance against the impugned order,
the same did not survive and that the State Government was not desirous of pursuing the appeal.
The appeal was, thus, dismissed as withdrawn on 29.9.2020 and the judgment was reserved in these
appeals.
The Path We Take:
30. We have given considerable thought to the issue at hand, keeping in mind the past litigation, the
statutory provisions and the narrow compass in which we have to examine the issue at hand.
31. There is no doubt that the prior rounds of litigation resulted in orders favouring the appellants.
The present round of litigation, however, arose on account of an endeavour to prevent alleged illegal
mining in the vicinity of the Kaimur Wildlife Sanctuary located in Village Billi Markundi in
Sonbhadra District. The Notification dated 20.3.2017 of the MoEFCC declared the ‘area in question’
as an ESZ under the provisions of the EPA. The sequitur was that the State of UP placed before the
NGT the factual position relating to the grant of leases and according to them, there were stated to
be 33 leases operational outside the ESZ. The NGT wanted to examine this on account of the orders
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
12

passed on 4.5.2016 in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad28 case for cancellation of all mining leases
and all other non-forestry activities on areas notified under Section 4 of the Forest Act. The whole
object was to find out as to what lay outside of the reserved limit of the forest area and it was found
that there were some active leases still in force on the lands which were covered under the
notification issued under Section 4 of the Forest Act. But despite this, the notification under Section
20 of the Forest Act had not been issued. The directions which arose from the impugned order of the
NGT on 13.7.2018, were towards this objective.
32. We have already noted that the leaseholders were, however, not 28 (supra) made parties, not
even in a representative capacity. This is the reason that these aspects could not be examined with
the assistance of the appellants by the NGT, and the mining activity was stopped resulting in the
appeals before us. We, thus, called upon the State of UP to perform their statutory duty of issuance
of the notification under Section 20 of the Forest Act and after some delay, the same was issued only
on 15.6.2020. It is only at that stage that the leases which were not covered, as in the case of the
appellants, had a final clarity and the issue, received a closure. However, this did prevent the mining
activity till then, from the time it was banned by the NGT. In the mean time, there are leases which
have expired and there are other leases which are still in force as is apparent from the detailed chart
which we have set out at the inception of our judgment.
33. Insofar as the question whether to adopt the course of extending the leases for the obstructed
period or in some way compensating the appellants for the same, is what was debated and we have
already noted the rival contentions of the two parties.
34. We have, at the inception, stated that we are conscious of the statutory provisions and, thus,
would not like to infringe the same, apart from the fact that it may not be an appropriate course of
action as it may open other floodgates as if these rounds are not enough!
35. The judicial opinions referred to by learned counsel for the State of UP no doubt lead to a more
or less consistent view that a mere filing of an application either for the grant of a lease or for the
renewal of a lease does not confer a vested right for either grant or renewal of a lease (Sukhan
Singh29 case). The statutory provision of Rule 68 of the Mining Rules, which has been strongly
relied upon by learned counsel for the appellants, is in the nature of a relaxation rule in special cases
and has to be read with the Rules which provide the manner in which the exploitation of minerals
should take place (Mohammad Yunus Hasan30 case). Thus, the expression used is “in the interest of
mineral development it is necessary so to do…” The idea, thus, is that the objective of exercising
such power should be to aid the development of minerals and such judicial view is of significance as
there was always a possibility of the misuse of such power, considering the history of (supra)
30(supra) mineral exploitation in our country. The statute was worded in a restrictive manner
deliberately giving only a restricted window and this legislative intent ought not to be defeated by
supplanting it with any other interpretation. It is a well settled principle of interpretation that when
the words of a statute are clear and unambigous, recourse to different principles of interpretation,
other than the rule of literal construction, cannot be resorted to.31 If a fresh grant or extension has
to be made under the Mining Rules, it must be in accordance with Chapter II, and the provision for
auction of leases in Chapter IV is in furtherance of a transparent procedure.
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
13

36. We do find ourselves in agreement with the submission of the learned counsel for the State that
the right to extension of lease either flow from a statutory provision or from the terms of the lease
between the concerned parties. If there has been an obstructed period by reason of a judicial
interdict, that itself will not give window to extend the lease by not following the statutory
provisions, especially when the terms of the lease do not provide for any consequences thereof. 31
Delhi Transport Corporation v. Balwan Singh and Ors., 2019 SCC OnLine SC 276
37. We may notice that this view has been adopted by the Allahabad High Court in Vijay Kumar
Dwivedi32 case where the same question was examined. The leaseholders were
obstructed/restrained from carrying out the mining activity during the subsistence of their leases
upon the orders of the High Court or of the competent authority. The High Court adopted the view
that after the issuance of the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 this could not be done.
38. We are conscious of the fact that the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 also finds elucidation in certain other
judicial pronouncements and that this aspect was clarified by the subsequent G.O. dated 26.2.2013
and then both the G.Os. were cancelled vide G.O. dated 22.10.2014, which would hold the field. In
pursuance thereof, 35 mining leases are stated to have been issued but that itself would not make a
difference because we have to see what are the subsequent developments and what course to adopt
as on date. Even if we consider the interpretation sought to be put forth by learned senior counsel
for the appellants of an expanded view of Rule 68, giving power to the State to extend the lease for
the obstructed period, would it now be exercisable is the question.
32 (supra)
39. The State of UP had issued a New Mining Policy on 12.6.2017 and this policy has no provision
for grant of extension of time for obstructed period of mining lease and all mining leases were to be
permitted by e- tendering or e-auction alone. If the mining lease is extended for the obstructed
period, it would amount to violation of this New Mining Policy and since the extension would have
to be granted now, we are unable to accept the contention of the learned senior counsel for the
appellants that this should relate back to the date of the lease and not as on date.
40. We may also notice that the statutory rule, Rule 40(h) of the Mining Rules, extracted in para 16
itself, provides for the consequences of the disruption of mining operations in a lease area owing to
any special circumstances and requires the DM, with the prior approval of the State Government, to
adjust the amount equivalent to the installments payable during the disrupted period against
forthcoming installments. Thus, monetary adjustment is all that has been provided for by the statute
making the legislative intent obvious, i.e., that if some amounts have been paid as installments
under the mining lease for the period when the beneficiary is not able to operate the mining area,
only that amount is liable to be refunded. This is what forms the basis of the submission made on
behalf of the State of UP that they are only liable to refund (i) any security deposit; or (ii) advance
royalties paid to them, for this obstructed period – something to which the State of UP has already
consented before us as recorded in our order dated 10.8.2020. The view taken by the High Court in
Nar Narain Mishra33 case no doubt was in the context of the applicability of the G.O. dated
31.5.2012 and received the imprimatur of the Supreme Court in Sulekhan Singh34 case. But we have
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
14

also to note that the observations dealt with the issue also on the submission advanced that ‘imarti
patthar or building stone’ is not covered by the G.O. dated 31.5.2012 and that contention was not
accepted. The word ‘boulder’ was held to be included in the heading of ‘building stone’ as well as
when found in a mixed form in riverbeds and the prayer of the leaseholder was not accepted.
41. We are conscious of the fact, as already noticed, that the appellants have suffered in the second
round and the plea advanced on their behalf 33 (supra) 34 (supra) that if there were interdicts posed
by a competent court that should not put a party at a disadvantage. This rule is ordinarily to be
accepted for placing a successful party in the same position, which they had been in, if the wrong
complained against them would not have been done to them.35 However, this cannot be a blanket
proposition and we have to consider the context in which the interdict was passed, i.e., to preserve
the forest area. It is a different matter that some leases were ultimately found as within the
restricted area and some outside (as is the case of the appellants). Even if we take the notification of
the State of UP dated 31.7.2014 into account, and the authorisation of the DMs to extend the lease
where no third party interest was created and the leases were prevented from operation for no fault
attributable to the leaseholders, the subsequent transparent policy of 2017 would weigh in favour of
not exercising the jurisdiction to extend the leases for the obstructed period.
42. We, thus, find that the appropriate course of action to be adopted in this case cannot be to
extend the lease for the obstructed period but to direct that the security deposit, if not already
refunded, should be refunded and the amount deposited by the appellants/leaseholders as 35 Beg
Raj Singh case (supra) advance royalties to the respondent/State be also paid back to them along
with something more.
43. We now come to that something more and we are taking recourse to that course of action by
exercising our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India to do complete justice inter
se the parties. We do this, keeping in mind that the appellants’ monies have remained blocked and
mining prevented for no fault of theirs, despite success in earlier legal proceedings, and this aspect
has to be balanced with the statutory provision or for that matter, even the contractual provisions
not providing for extension of leases. We are, thus, of the view that since these monies have
remained blocked, the monies should carry simple interest @ 9% per annum.
44. Insofar as the security deposit is concerned, if it has already been refunded, it would naturally
not carry any interest and if not, then it will carry interest from the date it ought to have been
refunded after the expiry of the lease till it is actually refunded in case of expired leases. On the other
hand, so far as the advance royalties for the obstructed period are concerned, the said amounts will
carry interest @ 9% per annum from the date the obstruction occurred, i.e., 29.8.2018 and 5.2.2019,
as applicable to the respective appellants, till the date of payment.
Conclusion:
45. The appeals are, thus, decided as aforesaid with the limited directions and to the
extent the observations in the impugned order are in contradiction thereto are set
aside. It is directed that the following amounts be refunded to the appellants:
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
15

i. Security deposit, if not already refunded, with simple interest @ 9% per annum
from the date it ought to have been refunded after the expiry of the lease till it is now
actually refunded, in case of expired leases; and ii. Advance royalties, if not already
refunded, with simple interest @ 9% per annum from the date of the obstruction
occurred, i.e., 29.8.2018 and 5.2.2019 as applicable to the respective appellants, till
the date of payment. iii. Both the aforementioned amounts be refunded within two
months from today.
46. The appeals are disposed of in terms aforesaid, leaving the parties to bear their
own costs. All pending applications also stand disposed of.
...……………………………J. [Sanjay Kishan Kaul] ...……………………………J. [Hrishikesh Roy] New Delhi.
October 28, 2020.
Dharmendra Kumar Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 28 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9006005/
16
