Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika
on 19 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 391
Author: Ashok Bhushan
Bench: R. Banumathi, Ashok Bhushan, A.S. Bopanna
                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CIVIL APPEAL NOS.9350-9351 OF 2019
                         (arising out of SLP (C)NOS.29261-29262 OF 2019)
          FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA                       ...APPELLANT(S)
                                             VERSUS
          BRIHANMUMBAI MAHANAGAR PALIKA & ORS. ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                        J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
This appeal has been filed by the Food Corporation of India challenging the judgment dated
05.05.2016 of Division Bench of Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 2672 of 2001 by which
judgment the writ petition filed by the Food Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as “FCI”)
challenging the demand made by Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai of property tax has
been dismissed.
2. The brief facts necessary to be noted for deciding this appeal are: -
2.1 The Government of Bombay acquired land at Village Poisar and at Village
Magathane, Borivali for Government of India prior to the year 1964. Upon
completion of the acquisition proceedings, the lands vested in the Government of
India and the Government of India constructed the godowns and silos on the
acquired land for storage of food grains.
2.2 FCI was set up under the Food Corporations Act, 1964 with the purpose of
undertaking the purchase, storage, movement, transport, distribution and sale of
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
1

food grains and other food stuff.
2.3 on 28.10.1988, a notice demanding non-
agricultural tax was issued to the FCI and the FCI protested against the levy of non- agricultural tax
and filed a writ petition, which was dismissed by learned Single Judge on 10.11.1988. A Letter Patent
Appeal No.259 of 1989 was filed by the FCI, which was allowed by the Division Bench vide its
judgment dated 03.12.1992 holding that land vested in Central Government on which godowns were
constructed, hence, Central Government was not liable to pay taxes for non-
agricultural use of land as per Article 285 of the Constitution of India.
2.4 The Government of India wrote a letter dated 17.02.1992 to FCI, New Delhi stating that the land
for godowns was acquired by the erstwhile Government of Bombay for Government of India on
which godowns were constructed by the Government of India and when the FCI came into being in
1965, these godowns alongwith other godowns of the Government were transferred to FCI during
the period from 1966 to 1969. The Government of India, however, has not executed any conveyance
deeds for these godowns with the FCI and legal ownership of these godowns still vests in the
Government, the Status of FCI, therefore, is that of an occupier.
2.5 Letters and demands were issued by Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay (hereinafter
referred to as “Corporation”) demanding property tax in respect of property situate in Dattapada
Road, Borivali owned by FCI. A demand notice dated 04.09.2001 was issued by the Corporation
asking to make payment for the period from 01.03.1969 to 31.03.1997 and taxes from 01.04.1997
onwards. The FCI protested the demand claiming exemption from payment of property tax as per
Article 285 of the Constitution of India, the property being owned by the Central Government. The
plea of the appellant was not accepted and a further notice dated 24.09.2001 was issued asking for
payment of property tax. The properties were also attached.
2.6 A Writ Petition No. 2672 of 2001 was filed by the FCI, in which FCI has prayed to declare the
demand for payment of property tax as illegal. Prayer was also made to issue a writ of prohibition
prohibiting the respondents, their servants and agents in pursuance of letter dated 04.09.2001 and
24.09.2001. The Corporation decided the claim of the FCI. A Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court relying on the judgment of this Court in Food Corporation of India Vs. Municipal Committee,
Jalalabad and Another, (1999) 6 SCC 74 dismissed the writ petition vide judgment dated
02.02.2002. A review petition was filed by FCI to review the judgment, which too was dismissed on
04.10.2002. The FCI filed a special leave petition against the judgment dated 02.02.2002 as well as
against the order dated 04.10.2002 in review petition. It was contended before this Court that High
Court erred in relying on the judgment of the Court in Food Corporation of India Vs. Municipal
Committee, Jalalabad (supra) without referring to the earlier Division Bench judgment of Bombay
High Court in Civil Appeal No. 259 of 1999 dated 03.10.1992 wherein the Division Bench had held
that properties in dispute in the present case is owned by the Central Government and not by FCI.
This Court after noticing the submissions of both the parties allowed the appeals, set aside the
impugned judgment of the High Court observing that since the High Court has not gone into these
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
2

questions, the matter is remitted back to the High Court for fresh decision in accordance with law.
All the contentions were left open.
2.7 After the above judgment of this Court dated 26.07.2006, the Division Bench of the Bombay
High Court by judgment dated 05.05.2016 again dismissed the Writ Petition No.2672 of 2001.
Special Leave Petition No. 24251 of 2016 was filed questioning the judgment dated 05.05.2016. This
Court noticed the submissions made by FCI and by order dated 26.08.2016 observed that it would
be more appropriate for the petitioner (FCI) to approach the High Court by filing a review petition.
After the judgment of this Court dated 26.08.2016, review petition was filed, which too was
dismissed by non-speaking order dated 11.09.2018 by the Division Bench of the Bombay High
Court.
2.8 These appeals have been filed against the Division Bench judgment dated 05.05.2016 dismissing
the writ petition and order dated 11.09.2018 dismissing the review petition.
3. We have heard Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant and
Shri Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel appearing for the Corporation.
4. Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel submits that demand of property tax is exempted
by virtue of Article 285 of the Constitution of India. It is submitted that the property (godowns) with
regard to which property tax has been demanded is owned by Central Government, hence, the
payment of tax is exempted. It is submitted that a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in its
judgment dated 03.12.1992 by quashing the demand of non-agricultural assessment tax by the State
Government has categorically held that the property is owned by the Central Government. The
Division Bench in the impugned judgment has not considered the effect of the Division Bench
judgment dated 03.12.1992. It is further submitted that even when this Court granted liberty to the
appellant to file a review petition against the judgment dated 05.05.2016, after noticing the
submissions of the appellant, the review petition too was dismissed by non-speaking order without
considering any of the submissions of the appellant. It is submitted that to be entitled to levy tax
under Article 285(2), the Corporation must establish three things, firstly that the property in
question is liable to tax prior to commencement of the constitution; secondly, that the tax has been
continuously collected by the State on that property; and thirdly that the State in which the
authority collected the tax was collecting the same pre and post Constitution. It is submitted that
property tax was never levied by the Corporation prior to the commencement of the Constitution of
India and it was only after decision dated 17.01.1997 of the arbitrator appointed under Section
144(2) of Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 that the properties belong to the FCI, the
Corporation started demanding property tax from the appellant. It is submitted that jurisdiction of
the arbitrator appointed under Section 144(2) is limited to fixing the rateable value of Government
owned properties and he had no jurisdiction to decide the question whether the properties were to
be excluded from the Government list. Learned senior counsel further submits that Corporation has
erroneously relied on judgment of this Court in the case of Food Corporation of India Vs. Municipal
Committee, Jalalabad (supra), which was a case dealing with the properties owned by the FCI and
has no application in the facts of the present case. It is submitted that property being property of
Central Government was clearly exempted from payment of property tax.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
3

5. Shri Pallav Shishodia, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents refuting the
submissions of the learned senior counsel for the appellant contends that the appellant is liable to
pay property tax. He submits that as per Section 146 of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act
[Bom. III of 1888], the levy is on actual occupier and the appellant being actual occupier of the
premises is, thus, clearly liable to pay the property tax. For the purpose of liability to pay the
property taxes what is required is that the concerned person who holds the property immediately
from the Government is in occupation and use of the property in question. It is immaterial in what
capacity such person is in occupation of the property exigible to taxes. It is submitted that the
appellant cannot claim exemption from taxes under Article 285 as the FCI is distinct entity from
Central Government and the so-called ownership of Central Government with respect to the
property in question occupied by FCI is of no consequence as far as the tax liability is concerned.
Section 143(1)(b) of the Act, 1888 is not attracted. The levy under Act, 1888 is a pre- Constitution
levy and, therefore, Article 285(2) of the Constitution of India applies. Article 285(2) carves out an
exception to clause (1) and saves the levy which any authority within the State was levying on the
property of the Union to which such property immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution was liable. Under the Act, 1888, the premises vesting in the Central Government were
liable for property tax on the date of commencement of the Constitution. There is no law enacted by
the Parliament after coming into force of the Constitution, which prevent the respondent –
Municipal Corporation from levying the tax on the premises vesting in the Government.
6. Shri Kaul in rejoinder submits that ownership still vests in the Central Government when the
owner is not liable, occupier cannot be held to be liable to pay property taxes. The judgment of this
Court in Food Corporation of India Vs. Municipal Committee, Jalalabad (supra) was a case where
FCI was the owner of the property, hence the said case has no applicability in the facts of the present
case. The arbitrator appointed under Section 144(2) went wrong in holding that FCI owns the
property. His jurisdiction was only to determine the rateable value insofar as services rendered by
the Corporation namely water charges etc., which the appellant is willing to pay. He further submits
that the appellant is also willing to pay the amount in lieu of general tax to be determined in
accordance with Section 144 of Act, 1888.
7. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the
records.
8. The main question to be determined in this appeal is as to whether the property in question is
exempted from payment of property tax by virtue of Article 285 of the Constitution of India. The
High Court in the impugned judgment has primarily relied on Section 146 of the Act, 1888 in
rejecting the claim of exemption under Article 285 of the Constitution of India. According to the
High Court, the appellant being occupier of the godowns will be primarily liable to pay the property
taxes. The main reasons of the High Court in rejecting the claim of the appellant are contained in
paragraphs 12 and 15, which are as follows:-
“12. The contention of the petitioner is that in view of clause 1 of Article 285, since the
lands and godowns in respect of which property taxes are levied are the properties of
the Government of India, the same are exempted from taxes imposed by a State or
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
4

any other Authority within the State. Clause 2 of Article 285 carves out an exception
to clause 1. If any Authority within the State was levying any taxes on the property of
the Union of India to which such property was immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution of India liable or treated as liable, the taxes can
continue to be levied till the Parliament by a law otherwise provides. Under the said
Act of 1888, the premises vesting in the Government of India were liable for property
taxes on the date of commencement of the Constitution of India. The words
"Government" appearing in sub-section 1 of section 146 was substituted for the words
"the Crown" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. Thus, as per the
provisions of the said Act of 1888, the property of the Union of India within the
jurisdiction of the said Corporation was liable for levy of property taxes immediately
before the commencement of the Constitution of India. There is no law enacted by
the Parliament after coming into force the Constitution of India which prevents the
said Municipal Corporation from levying the taxes on the premises vesting in the
Government. Therefore, Article 285 is of no help to the petitioner in view of
applicability of clause 2 of Article 285 of the Constitution of India.
15. In view of the provisions of the said Act of 1888, the petitioner will not be entitled
to the benefit of clause 1 of Article 285 and in view of sub-section (1) of section 146 of
the said Act of 1888, the petitioner being the occupier of the godowns will be
primarily liable to pay property taxes.”
9. For considering the respective submissions of counsel for the parties, we first need to look into
the statutory provisions pertaining to the assessment of property tax as well as the provisions of
exemption from payment of tax on the property belonging to Central Government. Chapter VIII of
the Act, 1888 deals with “Municipal Taxation”. Section 139 provides that “for the purposes of this
Act, taxations to be imposed shall consist property taxes and other taxes. Sections 143, 144 and 146,
which are relevant for the present case are as follows:-
“143. General tax on what premises to be levied.
(1) The general tax shall be levied in respect of all buildings and lands in Brihan
Mumbai except—
(a) buildings and lands or portions thereof exclusively occupied for public worship or
for charitable purposes;
(b) buildings and lands vesting in Brihan Mumbai used solely for public purposes and
not used or intended to be used for purposes of profit or in the Corporation, in
respect of which the said tax, if levied, would under the provisions hereinafter
contained be primarily leviable from the Government or, the corporation
respectively;
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
5

(c) such buildings and lands vesting in, or in the occupation of, any consul de
carriers, whether called as a consul general, consul, vice-consul, consular agent, pro-
consul or by any other name of a foreign State recognised as such by the Government of India, or of
any members (not being citizens of India) of staff of such officials, and such buildings and lands or
parts thereof which are used or intended to be used for any purpose other than for the purpose of
profit.
(2) The following buildings and lands or portions thereof shall not be deemed to be exclusively
occupied for public worship or for charitable purposes within the meaning of clause (a), namely: —
(c) those in which any trade or business is carried on; and
(d) those in respect of which rent is derived whether such rent is or is not applied exclusively to
religious or charitable purposes.
(3) Where any portion of any building or land is exempt from the general tax by reason of its being
exclusively occupied for public worship or for charitable purpose, such portion shall be deemed to
be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.
144. Payment to be made to the Corporation in lieu of the general tax by the Central Government or
the State Government as the case may be.
(1) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall pay to the
corporation annually, in lieu of the general tax from which buildings and lands vesting in
Government are exempted by clause (b) of section 143, a sum ascertained in the manner provided in
sub- sections (2) and (3).
(2) The rateable value of the buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai vesting in Government and
beneficially occupied, in respect of which but for the said exemption, general tax would be leviable
from the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall be fixed by a
person from time to time appointed in this behalf by the State Government with the concurrence of
the corporation. The said value shall be fixed by the said person, with a general regard to the
provisions hereinafter contained concerning the valuation of property assessable to property-taxes,
at such amount as he shall deem to be fair reasonable. The decision of the person so appointed shall
hold good for a term of five years, subject only to proportionate variation, if in the meantime the
number or extent of the building and lands vesting in Government in Brihan Mumbai materially
increases or decreases.
(2A) Where the Corporation has adopted the levy of property tax on capital value of buildings and
lands, the capital value of buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai vesting in Government and
beneficially occupied, in respect of which but for the said exemption, general tax would be leviable
from the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall be the book value
of such buildings or lands in Government records and such capital value shall hold good for a term
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
6

of five years, subject only to proportionate variation, if in the meantime the number or extent of the
buildings and lands vesting in Government in Brihan Mumbai materially increases or decreases.
(3) The sum to be paid annually to the corporation by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, shall be eight-tenth of the amount which would be payable by an
ordinary owner or buildings or lands in Brihan Mumbai, on account of the general tax, on a rateable
value or on capital value, as the case may be, of the same amount as that fixed under sub-section (2),
or sub-section (2A), as the case may be.
146. Primary responsibility for property taxes on whom to rest.
(1) Property-taxes shall be leviable primarily from the actual occupier of the premises upon which
the said taxes are assessed, if such occupier holds the said premises immediately from the
Government or from the corporation or from a fazendar. Provided that the property-taxes due in
respect of any premises owned by or vested in the Government and occupied by a Government
servant or any other person on behalf of the Government for residential purposes shall be leviable
primarily from the Government and not the occupier thereof.
(2) Otherwise the said taxes shall be primarily leviable as follows, namely:—
(a) if the premises are let, from the lessor;
(b) if the premises are sub-let, from the superior lessor;
(c) if the premises are unlet, from the person in whom the right to let the same vests;
(d) if the premises are held or occupied by a person who is not the owner and the whereabouts of the
owner of the premises cannot be ascertained, from the holder or occupier; and
(e) if the premises are held or developed by a developer or an attorney or any person in whatever
capacity, such person may be holding the premises and in each of whom the right to sell the same
exists or is acquired, from such holder, developer, attorney or person, as the case may be:
Provided that, such holder, developer, attorney or person shall be liable until actual
sale is effected.
(3) But if any land has been let for any term exceeding one year to a tenant, and such
tenant or any person deriving title howsoever from such tenant has built upon the
land, the property taxes assessed upon the said land and upon the building erected
thereon shall be leviable primarily from the said tenant or such person, whether or
not the premises be in the occupation of the said tenant or such person.”
10. In British India, prior to the passing of the Government of India Act, 1935, the
question of exemption of Crown property from taxation was not definitely settled.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
7

Different High Courts have expressed divergent views. The Government of India Act,
1935 for the first time provided for exemption of certain public property from
taxation. Section 154 of the Act, 1935 provided for exemption from all taxes imposed
by, or by any authority within, a Province or Federated State all the properties vested
in His Majesty whereas Section 155 contained exemption of Provincial Governments
and Rulers of Federated States in respect of Federal taxation. Sections 154 and 155
are as follows:-
“154. Exemption of certain public property from taxation.- Property vested in His
Majesty for purposes of the government of the Federation shall, save in so far as any
Federal law may otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by, or by any
authority within, a Province or Federated State:
Provided that, until any Federal law otherwise provides, any property so vested which
was immediately before the commencement of Part III of this Act liable, or treated as
liable, to any such tax, shall, so long as that tax continues, continue to be liable, or to
be treated as liable, thereto.
155.Exemption of Provincial Governments and Rulers of Federated States in respect
of Federal taxation-(1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the Government of a Province
and the Ruler of a Federated State shall not be liable to Federal taxation in respect of
lands or buildings situate in British India or income accruing, arising or received in
British India;
Provided that-
(a) where a trade or business of any kind is carried on by or on behalf of the Government of a
Province in any part of British India outside that Province or by a Ruler in any part of British India,
nothing in this subsection shall exempt that Government or Ruler from any Federal taxation in
respect of that trade or business, or any operations connected therewith, or any income arising in
connection therewith, or any property occupied for the purposes thereof;
(b) nothing in this subsection shall exempt a Ruler from any Federal taxation in respect of any
lands, buildings or income being his personal property or personal income.
(2) Nothing in this Act affects any exemption from taxation enjoyed as of right at the passing of this
Act by the Ruler of an Indian State in respect of any Indian Government securities issued before that
date.”
11. The main provision of Section 154 although exempted properties vested in His Majesty from all
taxes imposed by a Province or Federated State or any authority within but proviso contains an
exception to the main provision, which provided that any property so vested which was immediately
before the commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 was liable, or treated as
liable, to any such tax, shall continue to be liable, or to be treated as liable, thereto so long as that tax
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
8

continues. The commencement of the Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 was w.e.f.
01.04.1937. The Constitution of India continued the exemption of taxation of the properties of
Central Government from the taxation by State or any authority as well as the State property from
Central taxation under Article 285 and Article 289. The proviso to Section 154 was retained as
sub-article(2) of Article
285. Article 285 and Article 289 of the Constitution are as follows:-
“285. Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.-- (1) The property of
the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt
from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides, prevent
any authority within a State from levying any tax on any property of the Union to
which such property was immediately before the commencement of this Constitution
liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in that State.
289. Exemption of property and income of a State from Union taxation.-- (1) The property and
income of a State shall be exempt from Union taxation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or authorising the imposition of,
any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide in respect of a trade or business of
any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected
therewith, or any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any
income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any class of trade or business,
which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.”
12. The provisions of Articles 285 and 289 are complimentary to each other. Section 154 of
Government of India Act, 1935 came for consideration before Calcutta High Court in
Governor-General of India in Council Vs. Corporation of Calcutta, AIR (1948) Cal.
117. Justice B.K. Mukherjea (as he then was) allowed the appeal of Governor-General in Council
holding that the property in question was exempted from municipal taxes, with which opinion,
Ormond, J. while writing a separate opinion agreed. In the above case, the Calcutta Corporation
assessed the premises in the year 1937 on account of substantial additions to and alteration of the
premises in the year 1941 and 1942. Objection was taken to the valuation by the Governor General of
India in Council on the ground that under Section 154 of Government of India Act, all buildings
which were not in existence prior to 01.04.1937 when Part III of Government of India Act, 1935
came into operation, and which were consequently not subjected to any assessment before April,
1937 were exempted from all taxes, and could not be assessed to municipal rates. The contention
was not accepted by the Executive Officer of the Calcutta Corporation and an appeal was filed by the
appellant to the Small Cause Court Judge, which was also dismissed. An appeal was filed in the High
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
9

Court against the above judgment. Justice B.K. Mukherjea while interpreting Section 154 laid down
following in paragraphs 10 and 13:-
“10. ……………Whatever is property for purposes of taxation under a particular statute
and is vested in His Majesty for purposes of Federation would be exempted from
taxation under Section 154, Government of India Act, unless it was liable to tax on
31-3-1937, and ex hypothesi, a property which was not in existence on 31-3-1937,
cannot be said to be liable to tax on that date……………………”
13. Our conclusion therefore is that the additional buildings raised on premises No. 7,
Gun Foundry Road after 31-3-1937 are exempted from payment of consolidated rates
under the Calcutta Municipal Act and the present assessment is to be made on the
basis of the land and buildings as they existed on 31-3-1937, excluding all additions
made subsequent to that date.”
13. Ormand, J. in paragraphs 28 and 29 laid down following:-
“28. The sole question in this appeal is the narrow one whether, firstly, new buildings
on the same land and secondly, alterations, additions and improvements made in a
building which existed before 1- 4-1937, are properties which were "immediately
before 1-4-1937 liable or treated as liable to the tax." Now for property to have been
liable to the tax before 1-4-1937, it is self-evident that that property must have been
in existence before 1-4-1937. Equally, I think, this must be so for property "treated as
liable" to the tax. There could have been no liability attached to a non-existent thing;
nor could there have been any treatment of a non-existent thing. It is outside the
power of comprehension to conceive of any property which could have been "treated
as liable to tax" if that property was not in a state of physical existence at the time.
29. This being so, it follows that the only taxable property brought within the
exception contained in the proviso is property which was in physical existence before
1-4-1937. The four conditions which it would be necessary for the Corporation to
establish to bring the property within the proviso would be:(1) Physical existence of
the property before 1-4-1937, (2) Liability of that property to the tax then, (3)
Physical existence of the same property now, that is to say, for the current period for
which tax is sought to be levied and (4) Liability of the property (if it were not Crown
property) to the tax now. The contention relied upon on behalf of the Corporation, if
analysed must come to this, that though a thing in itself was not in existence before
1-4-1937, yet if it is now in existence in a situation resting on, or attached to, or
forming part of, some particular area of land or building, which formed the taxable
unit before 1-4-1937, then that thing is itself taxable. It is said that what is being
taxed is the unit of property and that that unit of property can now be taxed in its new
form; that is to say, inclusive of the new thing on it, which did not previously exist:
for the reason that the same unit of property had existed before 1-4-1937 in an old
form without that new thing.”
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
10

14. The Calcutta High Court in the above judgment while interpreting Section 154 has
held that proviso to Section 154 shall be applicable for taxing property owned by His
Majesty only when such property was subject to tax on 31.03.1937 or earlier. The
property which came into existence subsequent to 01.04.1937 is not to be covered by
proviso and held covered by the main provision of Section 154 and not exigible to
property tax. The above judgment of the Calcutta High Court was noticed with
approval by Federal Court in The Corporation of Calcutta Vs. The Governors of St.
Thomas School, Calcutta, AIR 1949 F.C. 121. In the case before Federal Court, the
premises containing land and building were owned by St. Thomas School, which
buildings were constructed before April, 1942. In April, 1942, the premises were
requisitioned under the Defence of India Act for the purposes of the Government of
the Federation. Several buildings were constructed by the Central Government. In
the assessment made in the last quarter of 1944-45, the cost of all the additional
structures erected by the Central Government were taken into account while fixing
the annual value.
The respondents objected to the assessment and the contention that the value of the buildings put
up by the Central Government should be excluded in the revaluation was rejected by Deputy
Executive Officer, against whose decision an appeal was filed in the Court of Small Causes. The
Court of Small Causes accepted the contention of the respondent and held that the structures put up
by the Central Government were exempt from municipal taxes and therefore should not be included
in the valuation. The Judge, Small Causes Court relied on judgment of the Calcutta High Court in
Governor-General of India in Council Vs. Corporation of Calcutta (supra) and dismissed the appeal
of the Corporation. The Corporation filed the appeal before the High Court. While dismissing,
Federal Court laid down following in paragraph 12:-
“12. This reasoning also leads to the rejection of the second contention of the
appellants. The contention is that as the unit of taxation is the area mentioned in the
schedule to the agreement and as that unit was subject to taxation before April 1937,
the exemption in favour of the Crown given in Section 154 could not be availed of.
Whether any particular property falls within the exemption provided in Section 154,
Government of India Act, must depend on what is "property" within the meaning of
that section and not on what is regarded as a unit for purposes of assessment under a
local Municipal Act. The question in whether what is sought to be taxed is property
and, if so, whether the same is vested in the Government. If the answer to both these
is in the affirmative, the question is whether that property was liable to tax before
April 1937. In the present case the answer is clearly in the negative because the
additional structures were all put up after 1942 and therefore were not subject to the
municipal tax before April 1937. The result is that all the contentions' of the
appellants urged before us are rejected. The appeal, therefore, fails and is dismissed
with costs.”
15. The Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in The Corporation of Calcutta Vs.
Union of India, AIR 1957 Calcutta 548 had occasion to consider Article 285(2) of the
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
11

Constitution. The Division Bench referred to and relied on the earlier judgment of
Calcutta High Court in Governor-General of India in Council Vs. Corporation of
Calcutta (supra). The Division Bench noticed the Scheme of exemption as contained
in the Section 154 of the Government of India Act, 1935 and has extensively referred
to Division Bench judgment in Governor-General of India in Council Vs. Corporation
of Calcutta (supra) and laid down following in paragraph 11:-
“11. The Constitution retained and re-
employed the same phrase which, as the above observations show, had already been
judicially interpreted in the same manner as we have done on the present occasion.
That is a strong pointer to the legislative intent and amply supports our construction
of the words 'treated as liable' as used in Article 285(2) of the Constitution and, if that
construction is correct, there can possibly be no doubt, in the facts of the two instant
cases, that the present disputed assessments are valid. The safeguard, so far as Union
properties are concerned, is contained in the reservation in the very clause in
question, reserving power to the Parliament to provide otherwise. Until, however,
Parliament does so provide, Union properties which were treated as liable to a
particular local tax immediately before the coming into force of the Constitution
would remain liable for the same. Admittedly the disputed premises (as belonging to
the Central Government and owned by it) were actually assessed to Municipal tax,
and such tax was being paid and realised also, immediately before the,
commencement of the Constitution. The premises, therefore, on the above
construction of the Article, were 'treated as liable' to such tax on that date.
Admittedly also. Parliament has not, so far, by law, otherwise provided, as it has
undoubtedly the power to do under Article 285(2) of the Constitution.”
16. We had noticed above the fact that godowns in questions were constructed by the
Central Government after completion of the acquisition in the year 1964.
The submission which has been pressed by Shri Kaul is that the buildings in question being not
liable or treated to be liable for property tax immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution, the respondents cannot claim the benefit of Article 285(2). Although, it is not disputed
by the respondents that the godowns in question were not subject to property tax immediately
before the commencement of the Constitution but submission, which has been pressed by Shri
Shishodia is that under Act, 1888, the property of Central Government was exigible to tax
immediately before commencement of the Constitution, hence, the conditions of Article 285(2) are
fulfilled and Corporation is fully entitled to levy property tax on the appellant.
17. Before proceeding further, we may notice the factum of ownership of the property including the
godowns thereon. As noticed above, the land was acquired by the State of Bombay for the Central
Government and it was the Central Government, which constructed the godowns thereon. The
earlier Division Bench judgment of Bombay High Court dated 03.12.1992 in Civil Appeal No. 259 of
1989 has been referred to and relied by the appellant, by which judgment, the Division Bench has
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
12

set aside the levy of non-agricultural assessments as imposed on the appellant. The Division Bench
in the above judgment has also accepted the case of the appellant that legal ownership of the land
and the structures vests with the Government. In paragraph 33 of the judgment, following was laid
down:-
“(3). Shri Saraf, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Government of
Maharashtra, submitted that the Corporation is occupier of the lands and as occupant
is liable to pay non-agricultural assessment. The submission overlooks that the right
to recover assessment from the occupier is an enabling provision but cannot be
imported when the original owner is not liable to pay taxes. The power to recover
assessment from the occupier is available provided the original owner is not available
but is liable to pay the taxes. In view of the return filed on behalf of Government of
India, it is clear that the land still vests in Government of India and consequently, the
owner is not liable to pay any assessment. As the Central Government is not liable to
pay assessment, it is not open for the State Government to recover the same from the
Food Corporation of India who is merely occupier of the lands and holder of the
godowns on behalf of the Government of India. In our judgment, the claim of the
State Government for recovery of NA assessment and service of notices cannot be
sustained.”
18. The above status of the ownership of the property as noticed by the Division Bench in its
judgment dated 03.12.1992 has not been questioned before us. We, thus, proceed to consider the
submissions of the parties accepting the property including the construction thereon to be owned by
the Government of India.
19. What is the content and meaning of the expression as occurring in sub-article (2) of Article 285,
“prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which
such property was immediately before the commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as
liable so long as that tax continue to be levelled in that tax.” Whether Constitution framers intended
to clothe any authority within the State from levying any tax on any property, which property was
liable or treated to be liable to tax or whether mere power to tax the property of Union prior to the
commencement of the Constitution is sufficient to continue such power after the enforcement of the
Constitution irrespective of as to whether a property was subject to tax in the State or not. The
Constituent Assembly Debate in the above context throws a considerable light on the intention of
the Constitution framers on the content and meaning of Article 285 as now contained in the
Constitution of India.
20. Draft Article 264 which came for consideration before the Constituent Assembly on 9th
September, 1949 was to the following effect:
“Article 264 The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (Bombay: General): Sir, I move:
“That for article 264, the following article be substituted :-
      Exemption    of       “264.(1)            The
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
13

      property of the       property of the Union
      Union      from
                            shall be exempt    from
      State Taxation.
                            all taxes imposed by
                            a    State  or by any
                            authority   within    a
                            State
(2) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, prevent any local authority within a State from imposing any tax on any
property of the Union to which such property was immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as liable so long as that tax
continues to be levied in that State.” I will speak after the amendments have been
moved, if there is any debate.”
21. Amendments were moved to the Draft Article. Several members in the Constituent Assembly
spoke in favour of making the property of the Union subject to all taxes imposed by a local authority
within the State, save insofar as the Parliament may by law otherwise provide. Shri R.K. Sidhwa in
his speech stated that in the event Article 264 as proposed is passed the local authorities shall lose
substantial amount of Revenue which they are getting from taxes realise from properties of the
Central Government.
22. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar replying the debate has dealt with clause (2) of proposed Article 264. Dr.
B.R. Ambedkar in his reply stated that intention of clause (2) of Article 264 is to maintain the status
quo, that is those municipalities which are levying any particular tax on the properties of the Union
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution will continue to levy those taxes.
Following is the reply made by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar:
“The Honourable Dr. B.R. Ambedkar: Sir, I will first refer to the provisions contained
in clause (2) of the proposed article 264. I think it would be agreed that the intention
of this clause (2) is to maintain the status quo. Consequently under the provisions of
clause (2) those municipalities which are levying any particular tax on the properties
of the Union immediately before the commencement of the Constitution or on such
property as is liable or treated as liable for the levy of these taxes, will continue to levy
those taxes. All that clause (2) does is that Parliament should have the authority to
examine the nature of the taxes that are being imposed at present. There is nothing
more in clause (2), except the saving clause, viz., “until Parliament by law otherwise
provides”. Until Parliament otherwise provides the existing local authorities, whether
they are municipalities or local boards, will continue to levy the taxes on the
properties of the Centre. Therefore, so far as the status quo is concerned, there can be
no quarrel with the provisions contained in article 264.
The only question that can arise is whether the right given by clause (2) should be
absolute or should be subject to the proviso contained therein, until Parliament
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
14

otherwise provides. In another place where the matter was discussed I submitted
certain arguments for the consideration of the House.”
23. The Constituent Assembly adopted Article 264 as proposed by one addition in clause (1) by
adding the words “save insofar as the Parliament may by law otherwise provide”.
24. This Court has occasion to consider the provisions of Article 285 clause (2) of the Constitution in
Union of India owner of the Eastern Railway vs. The Commissioner of Sahibganj Municipality,
(1973) 1 SCC
676. The question which came for consideration before this Court has been noted in paragraph 1
which is to the following effect:
“The only question which falls for determination in these two appeals by certificate is
whether the respondent Municipality is entitled to levy and collect taxes on 32 blocks
of buildings some constructed after March 31, 1937 and some after January 25,
1950.”
25. In paragraphs 13 to 16, this Court observed that 32 blocks of buildings were
vested in the Union after April 1, 1937, and some of them after Constitution came into
existence, these properties could be made liable to pay tax to the Municipality only if
Parliament by law provided to that effect. Paragraphs 13 to 16 are as follows:
“13. The 32 blocks of buildings were not in existence before April 1, 1937. These 32
blocks of buildings were therefore not vested for purposes of the Government of the
Federation before the commencement of Part III of the 1935 Act. The 32 blocks of
buildings were thus exempt from all taxes imposed by any authority within a
province until a Federal law otherwise provided. Section 4 of the 1941 Act did not
provide for payment of taxes in respect of Railway property. Section 3 of the 1941 Act
stated that a Railway Administration shall be liable to pay any tax in aid of the funds
of any local authority if the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette
declares it to be so liable. It is an admitted feature in these appeals that there was no
notification under Section 3 of the 1941 Act declaring the Railway properties to be
liable to pay any tax in aid of the funds of any local authority.
14. Under Article 285 of the Constitution property of the Union was exempt from all
taxes until Parliament by law otherwise provides. There is no such law providing for
taxation of Railway property.
15. Clause (2) of Article 285 speaks of liability of Railway property to pay taxes where
such property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution liable
or treated as liable to pay any tax levied by any authority within a State. These 32
blocks of buildings were not liable to pay any tax because they were not in existence
before April 1, 1937 or before the commencement of the Constitution.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
15

16. The High Court was in error in construing the notification issued in 1911 under
the 1890 Act to continue by virtue of the provisions contained in Section 4 of the 1941
Act. These 32 blocks of buildings vested in the Union some of them after April 1, 1937
and some after the Constitution came into existence. These properties could be made
liable to pay tax to the Municipality only if Parliament by law provided to that effect.”
26. This Court also in the above judgment has approved the Federal Court judgment
in Corporation of Calcutta vs. Governors of St. Thomas’ School, Calcutta, AIR 1949
FC 121. Following was laid down in paragraphs 17 and 18:
“17. The High Court referred to the decision of this (sic) Court in Corporation of
Calcutta v. Governors of St. Thomas’ School, Calcutta and held that the ruling in that
decision did not apply to the facts in the present appeals by reason of Section 4 of the
1941 Act rendering the properties liable to tax. The High Court misconstrued the
provisions of Section 4 of the 1941 Act. The decision of this (sic) Court in St. Thomas’
School case1 directly applies to these appeals. St. Thomas’ School was situated at 4,
Diamond Harbour Road, Calcutta. The buildings were constructed before April 1942.
The premises were assessed to consolidated rates under the Calcutta Municipal Act.
In April 1942, the premises. were requisitioned for the purposes of the Central
Government. After the requisition the Central Government erected several structures
on the premises.
In 1944-45, there was a general revaluation by the Corporation of Calcutta. The cost of the
Additional structures erected by the Central Government was taken into account in determining the
annual value of the premises. The Governors of St. Thomas’ School objected to the valuation and
claimed that the value of the buildings put up by the Government should be excluded in the
revaluation. The Calcutta High Court held that Section 154 of the Government of India Act, 1935
applied to the buildings constructed by the Central Government and the proviso to Section 154 of
the 1935 Act was not applicable. This Court held that the buildings constructed by the Central
Government were vested in the Government. In view of the fact that the Additional structures were
put up by the Central Government after 1942, it was held that these were not subject to municipal
tax before April 1937.
18. The 32 blocks of buildings in the present appeals were not in existence before April 1, 1937 and
January 26, 1950. The notification under the 1890 Act did not apply to these 32 blocks of buildings.
There is no law declaring these 32 blocks of buildings to be liable to payment of municipal tax as
claimed by the respondent Municipality.”
27. The above Constitution Bench judgment of this Court clearly lays down that exemption from
payment of taxes on the properties of Central Government as available under clause (1) of Article
285 can be denied only when the property in question was exigible to the Municipal Tax prior to the
commencement of the Constitution or any Parliamentary law provides for properties to be exigible
to pay tax to the Municipality.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
16

28. Article 285 clause (2) again came for consideration before the Constitution Bench of this Court
in Union of India vs. City Municipal Council, Bellary, (1979) 2 SCC 1, explaining the content of
clause (2) of Article
285. Following was laid down in paragraph 7:-
“7……The property of the Union is exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any
authority within a State. But Parliament may by law provide otherwise and then any
tax on the property of the Union can be imposed and levied in accordance with the
said law. But then an exception has been carved out in clause (2). The exception is
not meant for levying any tax on such property by any State; but it is merely for the
benefit of any authority including the local authority like the Municipal Council in
question. Clause (1) cannot prevent such authority from levying any tax on any
property of the Union if such property was exigible to such tax immediately before
the commencement of the Constitution. The local authority, however, can reap
advantage of this exception only under two conditions namely, (1) that it is “that tax”
which is being continued to be levied and no other; (2) that the local authority in
“that State” is claiming to continue the levy of the tax. In other words, the nature,
type and the property on which the tax was being levied prior to the commencement
of the Constitution must be the same as also the local authority must be the local
authority of the same State to which it belonged before the commencement of the
Constitution. On fulfilment of these two conditions it is authorised to levy the tax on
the Union property under clause (2). As in the case of clause (1) it lies within the
power of Parliament to make a law withdrawing the exemption of the imposition of
the tax on the property of the Union, so in the case of clause (2) it is open to
Parliament to enact a law and finish the right of the local authority within a State to
claim any tax on any property of the Union, a right it derived under clause (2).
That is to say, in both the cases the ultimate power lies with Parliament.”
29. The Constitution Bench has also approved the Calcutta High Court judgment in
Governor-General of India in Council vs. Corporation of Calcutta, AIR (1948) Cal 116(2).
30. Durga Das Basu in Commentary on Constitution of India while commenting on Article 285,
Clause (2), has also said that the property must have been in physical existence immediately before
the commencement of the Constitution. In 8th Edition under the heading “Article 285, Clause (2):
Power of Local Authorities to Tax Union Property” following has been stated:
“ARTICLE 285, CLAUSE (2): POWER OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES TO TAX UNION
PROPERTY Saving of existing taxation This clause is in the nature of a Proviso upon
cl.(1). But it empowers Parliament to cut down the exception introduced by cl.(2).
Any local tax on Union property which is saved by cl.(2) shall cease to be valid as
soon as Parliament by law provides to that effect.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
17

While cl.(1) enumerates that property of the Union shall be exempted from any State
or local taxation, cl.(2) saves the existing power of local bodies to tax Union property
so long as Parliament does not legislate otherwise. Thus, the status quo as to local
taxation is maintained, but Parliament is given the power to control such taxation.
Article 285(2) does not permit levy of any tax by a State; it only benefits “the
authority within the State”, such as the municipal body.
“Liable or treated as liable” These words mean that in order to come within the
Proviso, the property must have been in physical existence immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution. There could have been no liability attached to a
non-existent thing; nor could there have been any treatment of a non-existent thin.
New buildings and structures erected on the land after the aforesaid date, are
therefore, exempt from tax though the land on which they have ben erected may be
liable to tax under cl.(2).
The conditions necessary to bring a property within cl.(2) in order to make it liable to
taxation are:
(a) Physical existence of the property immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution.
(b) Liability of the property to the tax on that date;
(c) Physical existence of the property now, i.e., at the time when the tax is sought to
be levied;
(d) Liability of the property to tax now;
(e) The tax in question must be the ‘same tax’ as that which was levied or leviable at
the commencement of the Constitution;
(f) The local authority seeking to levy the tax must be in the same State to which the
pre-
Constitution authority belonged;”
31. From the above discussion we arrive at the conclusion that for the applicability of clause (2) of
Article 285, the property on which tax is sought to be proposed ought to have been subject to
property tax before the commencement of the Constitution. Since, object of the Article 285(2) of the
Constitution was to continue the levy of the such tax which local authority was enjoying prior to the
commencement of the Constitution so as to maintain the status quo regarding the financial
resources of Municipal Corporation to avoid the complete exemption from property of Central
Government as provided under Article 285(1). In the present case the constructions on which the
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
18

property tax is sought to be imposed by Municipal Corporation came into existence only after 1964
and were not subject to property tax prior to the commencement of the Constitution, hence
condition for applicability of Article 285(2) is not satisfied. Resultantly the Municipal Corporation is
not competent to impose property tax denying the exemption under Article 285(1) of the
Constitution.
32. Shri Shishodia has placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in Food Corporation of India
vs. Municipal Committee, Jalalabad and another, (1999) 6 SCC 74. Shri Shishodia submits that this
Court in the above case has held that Food Corporation of India is not exempt from taxation under
Article 285. The question which came for consideration before this Court has been noticed in
paragraph 7 which is to the following effect:
“7. The question that arises before us is:
If the property of the Corporation is the property of the Union of India and, thus,
exempt from taxation imposed by the State or any authority within a State. Authority
in the present case would include local authority. A Constitution Bench of this Court
in Electronics Corpn. of India Ltd. v. Secy., Revenue Deptt., Govt. of A.P.,(1999)4
SCC 458, has held that a government company is distinct from the Central
Government and cannot claim exemption from taxation under Article 285 of the
Constitution. The case of the Corporation cannot be any different. The Act under
which it is constituted specifically makes the Corporation a body corporate having the
attributes of a company.”
33. This Court in the above case relying on Constitution Bench judgment in Electronics Corporation
of India Ltd. and others Vs. Secretary Revenue Department, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and others,
(1999)4 SCC 458, held that the Corporation is a distinct entity from the Union of India and is not
exempt from taxation under Article 285. The Constitution Bench in Electronics Corporation of India
Ltd. (supra) held that Article 285 is not applicable where assessee is an entity, separate and different
from Union Government. The Constitution Bench in paragraph 22 laid down following:
“22……Article 285 does not apply when the property that is to be taxed is not of the
Union of India but of distinct and separate legal entity. Each of the appellants being
companies registered under the Companies Act, they are entities other than the
Union of India.”
34. There cannot be any dispute to the proposition laid down by this Court in Food Corporation of
India vs. Municipal Committee, Jalalabad (supra) and by the Constitution Bench in Electronics
Corporation of India Ltd. (supra) Article 285 does not apply when the property that is to be taxed is
not of the Union of India but a distinct and separate legal entity. Had the property in question which
is sought to be taxed belonged to the Food Corporation of India, in the present case, the judgment of
this Court in Municipal Committee, Jalalabad (supra) as well as Electronics Corporation of India
Ltd. (supra) would have applied in full force, but in the present case the property being that of the
Central Government, both the above judgments are not applicable.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
19

35. The submission which has been made by Shri Shishodia to support the levy of property tax on
the appellant is that the appellant being occupier is liable to pay property tax in view of Section 146
of the 1888 Act. He submits that the primary responsibility for property tax being on occupier as per
Section 146(1) of 1888 Act, the Corporation cannot escape from its responsibility to pay property
tax. Sub-section (1) of Section 146 uses the expression “if such occupier holds the said premises
immediately from the Government…….”, the key words in the expression are “such occupier holds
the said premises”. The word ‘holds’ has various shades of meaning. Whether sub- section (1) of
Section 146 will hold the occupier that is the appellant to pay the property tax even though the
owner of the property Central Government is exempt from paying property tax under Article 285(1)
is the question to be answered.
36. The heading of Section 146 is “Primary responsibility for property taxes from whom to rest”.
When there is a claim of exemption from payment of property tax with regard to property owned by
the Government of India, the question of primary responsibility or secondary responsibility loses its
importance. When payment of property tax is exempt under Article 285(1) to tax the occupier runs
counter to the very claim of exemption as delineated by Article
285. Section 146 of 1888 Act as it exists now has to be construed in a manner so as to give effect to
the meaning and purpose of Constitutional protection granted under Article 285. The statutory
provision, may it be Section 146 of 1888 Act, cannot be read in a manner so as to run contrary to a
Constitutional provision.
37. In the event the claim of Municipality/Corporation to levy property tax is not covered by
sub-clause (2) of Article 285, it cannot be allowed to take recourse to any statutory provision or
device to make exemption under Article 285(1) nugatory. We are, thus, not persuaded to accept the
submission of Shri Shishodia that since the appellant is occupier of premises owned by Union of
India, is liable to pay property tax under Section 146(1) of 1888 Act. Both the premises and building
therein are entitled for exemption from payment of property tax under Article 285(1). At this stage,
it is required to be noted that the FCI is not in occupation of the godowns owned by the Government
of India as a lessee. Nothing is on record and it is also not the case on behalf of the Corporation that
any rent/lease amount is being recovered from the FCI. It appears that FCI is permitted to occupy
and use the godowns owned by the Government of India for the purpose of storage of the goods
which are required to be transported to the different Fair Price Shops under the public distribution
system.
38. We may notice some of the decisions which have been relied by Shri Shishodia in support of his
claim. Shri Shishodia has relied on Division Bench judgment of Gujarat High Court in F.C.I. vs.
Gandhidham Municipality, (2002)43(2) GLR 1845. The submission which was pressed before the
Division Bench of the High Court was that the Food Corporation of India, being an instrumentality
of the State Government, is not liable to pay municipal taxes in view of Article 285 of the
Constitution. From paragraph 2 of the judgment it is clear that land was originally owned by the
Government of India and the said land was given to the appellant- Corporation for the purpose of
construction of godowns. The Corporation made construction of godowns in the property. The
contention which was raised by the Corporation has been mentioned in paragraph 2 of the judgment
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
20

which is to the following effect:
“2. On behalf of the appellant-Corporation Mr.N.K.Pahwa for Mr.Mr.P.M.Thakkar
raised the contention that the Food Corporation of India, being an instrumentality of
the State Government, is not liable to pay municipal taxes in view of Article 285 of
the Constitution. This contention, in substance, is that the land was originally owned
by Government of India and the said land is given to the appellant-Corporation for
the purpose of construction of godowns and the appellant-Corporation is a statutory
corporation, no doubt, is owned by Government of India and therefore in view of
Section 99 of the Gujarat Municipalities Act read with Article 285 of the Constitution
no tax can be levied upon the property constructed by the appellant- Corporation.”
39. The Gujarat High Court held that the question involved in the appeal is settled by this Court in
the judgment in Food Corporation of India vs. Municipal Committee, Jalalabad (supra). In
paragraphs 4 to 6 Gujarat High Court held:
“4. We have considered the submissions made by both the sides and also gone
through the order passed by the learned single Judge. It will not be out of place to
mention that the substantial question involved in this appeal is now settled by the
Honourable Supreme Court in the case of FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA. vs
MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE, JALALABAD reported in (1999) 6 SSC 74, wherein the
Honourable Supreme Court had considered the identical question and in para 7 of its
judgment it was held as under:
"The question that arises before us is: If the property of the Corporation is property of
the Union of India and, thus, exempt from taxation, imposed by the State or any
authority within a State.
Authority in the present case would include local authority. A Constitution Bench of
this court in Electronics Corporation of India Ltd vs Secretary, Revenue Department,
Govt. of Andhra Pradesh (1999) 4 SCC 458 has held that a Government company is
distinct from the Central Government and can not claim exemption from taxation
under Article 285 of the Constitution. The case of the Corporation can not be any
different. The Act under which is constituted specifically makes the Corporation a
body corporate having the attributes of a company."
5. Further in para 11 of its judgment the Honourable Supreme Court has observed as under:
"even if the Corporation is an agency or instrumentality of the Central Government,
that did not lead to the inference that the Corporation is a Government department.
The reason is that Act has given the Corporation an individuality apart from that of
the Government."
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
21

6. In the above view of the matter, the law on the question is already settled by the Honourable
Supreme Court and, therefore, the first contention of Mr.Pahwa that in view of Article 285 of the
Constitution the Municipality cannot levy or collect taxes on the property of the Corporation has got
to be rejected.”
40. No exception can be taken to the above judgment of Gujarat High Court which has correctly
relied on this Court’s judgment in Food Corporation of India vs. Municipal Committee, Jalalabad
(supra) and Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (supra) when the property belonged to
Corporation who has constructed the godowns, it was liable to pay municipal taxes and the Division
Bench has rightly dismissed the appeal. The above judgment does not help the respondent, since, in
the present case the construction was made by the Government of India and ownership of the
Government of India of the premises including the construction in the present case has not been
questioned.
41. The next judgment relied by Shri Shishodia is Ahmedabad Aviation & Aeronautics Limited vs.
Govt. of Gujarat, 2014 SCC online Guj 15505. In the above case Ahmedabad Aviation & Aeronautics
Ltd., a public Limited Company had filed the writ petition for declaring that the Gujarat
Municipalities Act, 1963 is not applicable to the petitioners with further prayer for direction to
prohibit the respondent-Municipality from taking any coercive measures for recovering the
municipal tax from the petitioner-Company. The Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court
dismissed the writ petition. The petitioner was in occupation/possession and in use of Airfield which
was given by the Government of Gujarat with regard to which right of user was granted by the
Government of Gujarat through Department of Civil Aviation. There was Memorandum of
Understanding between the Company and the Government. The Gujarat High Court in the above
background held the petitioner liable to pay municipal tax. The case of the petitioner that it cannot
be said that the petitioner is not in exclusive occupation, possession and in use of the entire Airfield
nor they can be said to be lessee, was rejected. The Gujarat High Court relying on Section 113(2) of
the Gujarat Municipalities Act held the petitioner liable to pay tax. The Division Bench had also
relied on the earlier judgment of the Gujarat High Court in FCI v. Gandhidham Municipality
(supra). In paragraph 7.3 following was laid down:
“7.3 It is the case on behalf of the petitioners that as the petitioners cannot be said to
be in exclusive occupation, possession and in use of the Airfield, Mehsana and they
are permitted to use the Airfield / Airstrip on payment of user charges they cannot be
said to be lessee and the MOU cannot be said to be a lease deed and, therefore,
considering Section 113 of the Gujarat Municipalities Act the primary liability to pay
the municipal tax would be upon the owner-Collector, Mehsana and not upon the
petitioners as the petitioners cannot be said to be the lessee. The aforesaid seems to
be attractive but has no substance. For the purpose of liability to pay the municipal
tax, what is required to be considered is, whether the concerned person is in
occupation and use of the property in question or not and it is immaterial whether he
is in occupation as lessee or not. In the case of FCI Vs. Gandhidham Municipality
(Supra) considering Section 113(2) of the Act the Division Bench of this Court has
specifically observed and held that it is the occupier of the property, who is using the
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
22

property and for the said purpose the occupier cannot get away from the liability to
pay the tax of the local authority since the taxes are for the purpose of providing
services to the residents or occupiers of the property.”
42. The above judgment of the Gujarat High Court was on its own facts and was based on liability to
pay municipal tax under Section 113(2) of the Gujarat Municipalities Act. In the above case there
was no question pertaining to claim of any exemption from payment of tax from property of the
Union. Thus, the above judgment in no manner helps the respondent in the present case.
43. The Division Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgment relying only on sub-section (1)
of Section 146 held the appellant liable to pay property tax without giving any reason as to why the
appellant is not entitled to exemption from payment of property tax under Article 285. The High
Court has also not come to any conclusion that the Corporation is entitled to levy property tax on the
strength of Article 285 clause (2). The judgment of the Division Bench, thus, cannot be sustained.
44. As noted above, learned counsel for the appellant during his submission has not disputed the
liability of the Corporation to pay charges for services rendered by the Corporation including water
charges. He has further stated that the Corporation is willing to pay amount in lieu of the general
taxes as contemplated by Section 144 of 1888 Act. In paragraph 6 of Writ Petition No.2672 of 2001
filed by the appellant, liability to make payment of services charges or other services provided by the
Corporation was not denied. We may further notice that in the Review Petition No.37 of 2016 which
was filed by the appellant to review the judgment dated 05.05.2016 of the Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court, in paragraph 20 following prayers were made:
“20. Petitioner therefore pray that:-
(a) This Hon’ble Court may be pleased to call for the Records and Proceedings in Writ
Petition No.2672 of 2001 and after going through the legality, validity and propriety
thereof, review and/or revoke the Order of this Hon’ble Court dated 05.05.2016
therein;
(b) this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to direct the Respondent Nos.1 and 2 to
conduct an enquiry in accordance with the provisions of Sections 143 and 144 of The
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 and decide the ratable value of the
properties on which taxes were to be paid;
(c) pending the hearing and final disposal of the Review Petition, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 may
please be restrained from either demanding the Property Tax and/or issuing any fresh tax bill
and/or adopting any coercive steps for recovery of any property tax against the Petitioner;
(d) cost of the Petition may please be provided for;
(e) for such further and other reliefs as nature of the case may require.”
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
23

45. From the above, it is clear that the appellant is not denying its liability to pay services charges
and direction was sought to respondents to conduct an enquiry in accordance with the provisions of
The Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 and decide the ratable value of the properties on
which taxes were to be paid.
46. At this stage, we may also notice the judgment of this Court in Union of India and others vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh and others, (2007) 11 SCC 324, wherein it is held that water charges and
sewerage charges levied by the Jal Sansthan against the Railways for the services rendered by
Sansthan were termed as taxes, charges were not taxes but fees for the services rendered by the Jal
Sansthan which are not precluded by Article 285. This Court in paragraphs 11 and 23 laid down
following:
“11. The distinction has to be kept in mind between a tax and a fee. Exemption under
Article 285 is on the levy of any tax on the property of the Union by the State, and
exemption is not for charges for the services rendered by the State or its
instrumentality which in reality amounts to a fee. In this connection, a reference was
made to the decision of this Court in Sea Customs Act (1878), S. 20(2), In re3. This
was a case in which a reference was made by the President of India with regard to
levy of customs and excise duties on the State under Article 289 of the Constitution of
India wherein Sinha, C.J., Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo and Shah, JJ. answered the
question at para 31 as follows: (AIR p. 1777) “31. For the reasons given above, it must
be held that the immunity granted to the States in respect of Union taxation does not
extend to duties of customs including export duties or duties of excise. The answer to
the three questions referred to us must, therefore, be in the negative.”
23. In this case what is being charged is for service rendered by the Jal Sansthan i.e.
an instrumentality of the State under the Act of 1975. Section 52 of the Act states that
the Jal Sansthan can levy tax, fee and charge for water supply and for sewerage
services rendered by it as water tax and sewerage tax at the rates mentioned therein.
Though the charge was loosely termed as “tax” but as already mentioned before,
nomenclature is not important. In substance what is being charged is fee for the
supply of water as well as maintenance of the sewerage system. Therefore, in our
opinion, such service charges are a fee and cannot be said to be hit by Article 285 of
the Constitution. In this context it is to be made clear that what is exempted by
Article 285 is a tax on the property of the Union of India but not a charge for services
which are being rendered in the nature of water supply, for maintenance of sewerage
system. Therefore, in our opinion, the view taken by the Division Bench of the
Allahabad High Court is correct that the charge is a fee, being service charges for
supply of water and maintenance of sewerage system, which cannot be said to be tax
on the property of the Union. Hence it is not violative of the provisions of Article 285
of the Constitution.”
47. We, thus, clarify that even though appellant is exempted from payment of property tax by virtue
of Article 285 of the Constitution then liability to pay services charges for services rendered by the
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
24

Corporation cannot be denied and learned counsel appearing for the appellant has very fairly stated
so. In the result, we allow these appeals set aside the judgment of the High Court and held that the
appellant is exempted and not liable to pay property tax under 1888 Act. However, the appellant is
liable to pay services charges for the services rendered by the Corporation and it shall be open for
the respondents to conduct an enquiry in accordance with provision of Section 144 of 1888 Act to
decide the rateable value of the property. Ordered accordingly. Parties shall bear their own costs.
......................J. ( ASHOK BHUSHAN ) ......................J. ( M.R. SHAH ) New Delhi, March 19, 2020.
Food Corporation Of India vs Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika on 19 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164765023/
25
