Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of
Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 776
Author: S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench: Sanjiv Khanna, S. Abdul Nazeer, S. A. Bobde
                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS.3438-3439 OF 2020
                         (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos.17313-17314 of 2011)
          HOSPITALITY ASSOCIATION OF MUDUMALAI                   ….. APPELLANT(S)
                              VERSUS
          IN DEFENCE OF ENVIRONMENT AND
          ANIMALS AND ORS. ETC.                                 …..RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                                       Civil Appeal No.3437 of 2020
                                        SLP (C) No. 20154 of 2011
                                       Civil Appeal No.3440 of 2020
                                        SLP (C) No. 21460 of 2011
                                  Civil Appeal Nos.3442-3443 of 2020
                                   SLP (C) Nos. 21463-21464 of 2011
                                       Civil Appeal No.3444 of 2020
                                        SLP (C) No. 21461 of 2011
                                       Civil Appeal No.3445 of 2020
                                        SLP (C) No. 16668 of 2011
                                       Civil Appeal No.3447 of 2020
                                        SLP (C) No. 17160 of 2011
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
                                  Civil Appeal Nos.3448-3449 of 2020
Rachna
Date: 2020.10.14
17:55:29 IST
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
1

Reason:
                                   SLP (C) Nos. 17155-17156 of 2011
                                                    1
Civil Appeal Nos.3450-51 of 2020
SLP (C) Nos. 17150-17151 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3446 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21480 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3452 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21467 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3453 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21472 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3454 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21477 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3455 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21478 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3456 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21470 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3457 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21468 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3458 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 21469 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3459 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 24826 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3460 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 19112 of 2011
  Civil Appeal No.3461 of 2020
   SLP (C) No. 25010 of 2011
               2
       Civil Appeal No.3462 of 2020
        SLP (C) No. 31581 of 2011
       Civil Appeal No.3463 of 2020
        SLP (C) No. 35559 of 2013
       Civil Appeal No.3464 of 2020
        SLP (C) No. 30535 of 2011
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
2

       Civil Appeal No.3465 of 2020
        SLP (C) No. 35644 of 2013
       Civil Appeal No.3466 of 2020
        SLP (C) No. 30536 of 2011
       Civil Appeal No.3467 of 2020
         SLP (C) No. 9305 of 2012
         Civil Appeal No.3468 of 2020
         SLP (C) No(s).12388 of 2020
(arising out of SLP(C)….CC No. 5278 of 2012)
         Civil Appeal No.3469 of 2020
         SLP (C) No(s).12389 of 2020
(arising out of SLP (C)…CC No. 5312 of 2012)
       Civil Appeal No.3476 of 2020
         SLP (C) No. 5176 of 2012
       Civil Appeal No.3477 of 2020
         SLP (C) No. 2666 of 2012
       Civil Appeal No.3470 of 2020
         SLP (C) No. 7619 of 2012
      Civil Appeal No.3471-3472 of 2020
     SLP (C) No(s).21390-21391 of 2020
(arising out of SLP(C)….CC No.5161 of 2012)
                     3
                  Civil Appeal No.3473 of 2020
                   SLP (C) No. 37332 of 2013
                  Civil Appeal Nos.3475 of 2020
                   SLP (C) No(s).12393 of 2020
        (arising out of SLP(C)….Diary No. 16319 of 2017)
                   Civil Appeal No.3474 of 2020
                   SLP (C) No(s).12392 of 2020
          (arising out of SLP(C)…. CC No.9201 of 2012)
                      JUDGMENT
S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The appellants in these appeals have assailed the final judgment and order dated 07.04.2011 of
the High Court of Judicature at Madras, passed in Writ Petition (PIL) No. 10098 of 2008 along with
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
3

several other writ petitions including Review Application No. 131 of 2010 and Writ Petition No.
23939 of 2010 filed by the Hospitality Association of Mudumalai. The High Court by the impugned
judgment has upheld the validity of the Tamil Nadu Government Notification G.O.(Ms.) No. 125,
dated 31.08.2010 which had notified an ‘Elephant Corridor’ in the Sigur Plateau of Nilgiris District
and has further directed resort owners and other private land owners to vacate and hand over the
vacant possession of the lands falling within the notified elephant corridor to the District Collector,
Nilgiris within three months from the date of the judgment.
3. The appellant in Civil Appeal Nos.3438-3439 of 2020 (arising out of SLP (C) Nos.17313-17314 of
2011), is the Hospitality Association of Mudumalai, registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies
Registration Act, 1975, situated in the Nilgiris District of Tamil Nadu. The members of this
association have established resorts/guest houses in the Nilgiris forest area. The other appellants
are either the owners of the resorts/guest houses or the owners of the lands in and around the
Nilgiris forest area. Some of them have built dwelling houses on their lands, some of them have
encroached upon government lands and put up constructions thereon and some of them are
cultivating the said lands.
4. Before referring to the proceedings before the High Court and this Court, as well as the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, it would be helpful to refer to the
background facts and the prevailing ecological context in which the impugned G.O. was notified.
A. BACKGROUND
5. Despite being a figure of traditional cultural reverence, today the elephant species is severally
threatened in India. The crux of the problem is one that affects all wildlife in the country: land. As
India’s human population has grown exponentially in the past several decades, so has its demand
for resources. At its essence, that demand boils down to the requirement for more land – for
agriculture to grow more food and for construction of roads, dams, mines, railways and housing.
This demand for land has led to the degradation and fragmentation of the country’s forest cover.
The elephant, being a large agrarian animal, may weigh up to 4-5 tons and requires about 200-300
kgs. of fodder comprising of various plant species daily. It, therefore, needs large areas, which it uses
by rotation, so that it may not overgraze an area and in the process destruct it altogether. This allows
the natural vegetation of the habitats a chance to re-generate.
6. However, the ever-growing need for land, infrastructure and energy requirements of our large
population have slowly fragmented the elephant’s natural spaces which are now surrounded by
human habitation, agriculture, mining, roads and railways. The more forest habitat is fragmented,
the farther an elephant herd has to roam in search of food and water. Increasingly, elephants have to
move farther and farther afield, even from one forest area to another, often through small patches of
forests called corridors. As forest lands continue to be lost, these relatively narrow and linear
patches of vegetation form vital natural habitat linkages between larger forest patches. They allow
elephants to move between secure habitats freely, without being disturbed by humans. Further,
elephants are genetically programmed by nature to never inbreed within their birth family and thus
need to move around between gene pools to reproduce. These corridors aid this process by helping
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
4

different elephant populations to intermingle, which is essential for retaining the vigour of the
species and ensuring its long-term survival. By identifying and nurturing such corridors, deadly
confrontations between humans and elephants can be avoided, in addition to safeguarding the
welfare of the wildlife. Unfortunately, in most areas, the existing corridors are repeatedly being
destroyed which will block migration routes of the elephants and would result in the fragmentation
of the habitats as well as increased human- elephant conflict.
7. To prevent such conflict and protect elephants, the Government of India through the then
Ministry of Environment and Forests launched a centrally sponsored scheme ‘Project Elephant’ to
provide financial and technical support to the wildlife management efforts by States for their free
ranging populations of wild elephants. The ‘Project Elephant’ document was released in the year
1993. It admits that elephants are facing serious threat due to large scale destruction and
fragmentation of their habitat due to increase in human and cattle populations, felling of natural
forest and replacing them with single species, commercial plantation, excessive grazing, forest fires
and shifting cultivation, destruction or capture for crop raiding, human killings, encroachments and
man-made barriers/destructions such as roads, railway lines, dams, canals, tea gardens, agriculture
and industry etc. The ‘Project Elephant’ was to provide financial and technical support to major
elephant bearing States in the country. The project aims to ensure long term survival of viable
conservation reliant population of elephants in their natural habitats by protecting the elephants,
their habitats and migration corridors. Other goals of the ‘Project Elephant’ are addressing issues of
human-animal conflict and providing for welfare of captive elephants. The main activities under this
project include the following:
1. Ecological restoration of existing natural habitats and migratory routes of
elephants;
2. Development of scientific management planning for conservation of elephant
habitats and viable elephant populations in India;
3. Promotion of measures for mitigation of human-elephant conflict in crucial
habitats;
4. Moderating impact of human and domestic livestock activities in crucial elephant
habitats;
5. Strengthening of measures for protection of wild elephants from poachers and
unnatural causes of death;
6. Research on elephant management related issues;
7. Public conservation education and awareness programmes about elephants;
8. Eco-development of elephant habitats; and
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
5

9. Provision of improved veterinary care for elephants.
8. Specifically in the context of elephant preservation in Tamil Nadu, on 14.06.2006, the State’s
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden (‘PCCF’) had requested that the
private/patta lands forming the traditional movement corridors of elephants between the
Mudumalai Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park to other parts and also between Eastern and
Western Ghats be brought under the control of the Forest Department, by acquiring the lands after
paying compensation to the owners. The PCCF had highlighted the use of these patches of private
forest land, which serve as vital migratory routes, for non- forestry use as a serious threat to free
movement of elephants. The PCCF addressed another letter dated 6.11.2006 to the State
Government, proposing the Survey Nos. of the patta land to be acquired for the purpose of the
elephant corridors. Similarly, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, by its
letter dated 11.08.2006 to the State Government of Tamil Nadu had noted that 88 elephant
corridors had been identified by the Wildlife Trust of India’s book titled “Right of Passage –
Elephant Corridors of India” and requested that necessary action be taken for notification and
protection of the elephant corridors situated in Tamil Nadu, as identified in the aforesaid
publication.
9. Pursuant to this communication, the Government of Tamil Nadu issued a Government Order
dated 21.08.2007, appointing an Exploratory Committee with Collector of Nilgiris as the Chairman
and four other members consisting of District Forest Officer, Nilgiris North Division, Wildlife
Warden, Ooty, Officer of the Revenue Department, Ooty and the concerned Tehsildar. This
Committee was constituted for exploring the possibility of acquiring the patta lands with the
willingness of farmers who could spare their lands for acquisition for elephant corridors.
B. Proceedings before the Madras High Court
10. During this period, an organization called ‘In Defence of Environment and Animals’, represented
by its Managing Trustee ‘Elephant’ G. Rajendran, filed Writ Petition No. 10098 of 2008 before the
Madras High Court seeking issuance of a Writ of Mandamus directing the official respondents
therein to keep the elephant corridors free from encroachment and to prevent any other
disturbances to the free movement of elephants and other animals. It was the specific case of the
petitioner therein that the elephant corridor was being disturbed by some encroachers and builders.
Due to mushrooming of resorts, elephant corridors were either closed or becoming narrow. It was
further contended that the Forest Department had not taken any stringent action to evict the
encroachers from the elephant corridor. On 02.02.2009, the High Court passed an interim direction
to the District Collector, Nilgiris to file a status report showing the steps taken to remove the
encroachers from the lands falling under the elephant corridor.
11. Certain other writ petitions were filed by the Schedule Tribes and other Traditional Forest
Dwellers contending that they were not encroachers and that they had a right to occupy the land in
question under the Schedule Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006. It was further contended that on the strength of the order dated 02.02.2009 in
Writ Petition No.10098 of 2008, the District Collector had directed them to stop the cultivation of
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
6

these lands and that they were being prevented from collection of minor forest produce and grazing
their cattle. These writ petitions were clubbed together for hearing before the Madras High Court.
12. At this stage, Hospitality Association of Mudumalai, the appellant herein, filed an impleadment
application in the said case. It was contended that this association consisted of residents of the
Masingudi Bokkapuram area and that they had been providing hospitality services to tourists who
visit the area to see the wildlife and that there was a misguided sense of hostility towards the people
who own and run guest houses in this area from the authorities and self-proclaimed
environmentalists dwelling outside the area. It was also contended that the members of the said
association had been living in the said area for more than 50-60 years and that there had been
virtually no human-animal conflict in the area since there is little to no agriculture and the elephants
can freely move around throughout the area.
13. During the course of hearing, the District Forest Officer of Nilgiris North Division made a
presentation before the High Court to highlight the importance of the forests and corridors in the
region. The District Collector, Nilgiris also appeared before the High Court and showed certain
slides on his computer depicting a map of the corridor of elephants. He stated that to allow the
elephants to pass through the corridor, the unauthorized occupants had to be evicted. Similarly, the
State’s PCCF also made submissions before the High Court to highlight the necessity of preservation
of the elephant corridor by acquisition of patta lands. Considering the rival contentions of the
parties, on 30.09.2008, the High Court issued the following directions:
“(i) forest department, which has the knowledge of movement of elephant in the
corridor, may identify and inform the same;
(ii) the State Government may publish the information regarding the elephant
corridor and the area, in leading newspapers and also by drum beating/tom tom,
calling for objections of locals, if any, in the area in question;
(iii) after hearing the locals, particularly those who may be affected, they may finalize
the elephant corridor from which unauthorized occupants are to be evicted;
(iv) to ensure that schedule tribes and other forest traditional dwellers are not
affected, it is required to identify the other traditional forest dwellers in terms with
Schedule Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Tribes)
Rules, 2007;
(v) only after the recommendation and recording their names in the appropriate
register, they may proceed with eviction, by giving notice in the newspaper, by drum
beating/tom tom and by giving individual notice to the unauthorised occupants.
(vi) So far as the acquisition of the land is concerned, if any private land is required to
be acquired, they will have to follow the procedure under the Land Acquisition Act.
Prima facie, as the tribals and other forest dwellers cannot be evicted from the
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
7

unauthorized lands, their lands need not required to be acquired, if it is a forest land.
Learned counsel for the parties are requested to give further suggestion in the matter,
in the interest of public and elephants.”
14. Since there was opposition to the map prepared by the District Collector by the
contesting parties, the Court felt it necessary that a team of experts of the
Environment and Forest Department be constituted to identify the elephant corridor
and submit a report after taking into consideration different books published with
regard to elephant corridors.
15. In pursuance of the directions of the High Court, an Expert Committee was
constituted by the Government. The Expert Committee visited the elephant corridor
area in the Nilgiris twice, enquired with the field officers and tribals of the area and
obtained opinions from experts before submitting its report on 04.11.2009. A map of
the elephant corridor in the Sigur Plateau in Nilgiris region was also filed by the said
expert Committee before the High Court. Noting that the State Government was
responsible for notifying elephant corridors within its territory, the High Court on
01.12.2009 directed the State Government to choose one of the maps for the elephant
corridor out of either the one identified by the Expert Committee or the one
identified by the Wildlife Trust of India’s publication “Right of Passage – Elephant
Corridors of India”, which was referred to in the Central Government’s
abovementioned letter dated 11.08.2006. This order also directed the State
Government to file an affidavit disclosing the actions it intends to take against resort
owners and residents of the elephant corridor. In accordance with the High Court’s
directions, the State Government came forward with a decision that it will ensure that
no illegal construction takes place in the area shown as ‘elephant corridor’ in the
report of the Expert Committee and that no person will be allowed to put up fresh
solar/electrical fencing within the proposed area of the elephant corridor. Taking into
account the materials on record, the High Court passed a fresh order dated
03.12.2009 as under:
“(i) The State Government will have to decide as to which Elephant Corridor has to be
identified, i.e. corridor identified by the Central Government in the letter dated
11.08.2006, with the help of the State Forest Department and NGOs, or the proposed
Elephant Corridor as identified by the Expert Committee in the present cases,
preferably within one month.
(ii) The publication of such map showing the Elephant Corridor, should be made by the State
through the Forest Department, in two local newspapers, one in English and another in vernacular
Tamil, giving the details of Survey Numbers of private lands which are falling within the proposed
Elephant Corridor. The persons may be asked to submit their objections within a time frame, say
one month.
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
8

(iii) The intimation of such proposed Elephant Corridor along with a copy of the report of the Expert
Committee, should be also forwarded to each local Panchayats, which fall within the proposed
Elephant Corridor, so that the local persons can have the knowledge of the corridor of their own, if
they so choose.
(iv) No separate individual hearing is required to be given to any person, though a mass hearing may
be given as generally given in the “Land Acquisition” cases and on hearing such objections, the
proposed Elephant Corridor including the map containing the different Survey Numbers should be
finalized and be also published at an early date, say maximum within six months.
(v) No individual or any Association generally should intervene in the case. If they have any
objection, they may raise before the authorities concerned.
23. On such finalization, it will be open for the State to decide:
(a) Whether the private lands which are falling within the Elephant Corridor, do not
belong to Schedule Tribe and other traditional forest dwellers, who have a right
under the provisions of the Schedule Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, and whether such lands should be
acquired. If the decision is taken to acquire the lands, they will follow the regular
procedures as laid down under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act.
(b) If the State Government, in the meantime, wants to take over the management of
the private forest, it may do so in terms of Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Private Forest
(Assumption of Management) Act (LV of 1961), so as to enable the elephants to pass
through the corridor without any hindrance till the lands are acquired. ”
16. Here, it may be noted that the aforesaid order of 03.12.2009 passed by the High
Court was challenged before this Court through Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos.
14416–14422 of 2010 which was disposed vide order dated 30.04.2010 in the
following terms:
“Permission to file special leave petitions is granted.
Delay condoned.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for respondent no.1.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that if proposed Elephant Corridors
established, the petitioner would be seriously effected as his land falls in that area.
The petitioner would be at liberty to approach the Committee which is likely to
finalize the Elephant Corridors and also would be at liberty to approach the High
Court and seek intervention proceedings though the division Bench has already
indicated under other proceeding that no intervention is allowed.
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
9

With the above directions, the special leave petitions are disposed of.”
17. In pursuance of the directions of the High Court, the State Forest Department
issued a public notice dated 07.01.2010, thereby publishing a proposed elephant
corridor, as identified by the Expert Committee, and requiring the persons whose
private lands are falling within the proposed corridor to submit objections.
Public hearings were also held by the authorities concerned and the objections raised by various
persons were rejected. Thereafter, the State Government issued the impugned G.O., thereby
confirming the elephant corridor map as published on 07.01.2010 and also specifying the
boundaries of the elephant corridor and the Survey Nos. falling within the said corridor.
18. Several writ petitions were filed before the High Court challenging the impugned G.O. These
were clubbed with the other pending writ petitions and PIL and came to be decided by the High
Court’s impugned order dated 07.04.2011.
19. The High Court rejected the appellant’s contentions regarding the propriety of constitution of the
Expert Committee given that the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 (‘Wildlife Act’) does not envisage
the same and rather provides for constitution of State and National Boards for Wildlife. It was held
that the Expert Committee’s mandate did not impinge upon that of the Boards under the Wildlife
Act. The High Court also did not find merit in the appellant’s contention that the State Government
lacked the power to notify an elephant corridor. For this, the High Court relied upon Entries 17A
‘Forest’ and 17B ‘Protection of wild animals and birds’ in the concurrent list and the power of the
State Government to notify Sanctuaries, National Parks, Conservation Reserves and Community
Reserves under Chapter IV of the Wildlife Act.
20. Before the High Court, the appellant had also contended that the impugned G.O. sought to
create an “artificial corridor” in an area through which elephants do not traditionally pass. In
rejecting this contention, the High Court held that the material on record clinchingly showed that
the animals were already moving through the said area. The High Court observed that the appellant
and others have constructed holiday resorts and are carrying on commercial activities in the area
despite only holding permissions for construction of dwelling houses. The mushrooming of such
resorts, which were bounded by electric fencing and barbed wires, had severally restricted the
movement of elephants and caused an increase in incidents of human-elephant conflict.
Accordingly, the High Court passed the following directions which are under challenge before us:
“The resort owners and other private land owners are directed to vacate and hand
over the vacant possession of the lands falling within the notified ‘elephant corridor’
to the District Collector, Nilgiris within three months from today. In the meanwhile,
the Government of Tamil Nadu is permitted to go on with the implementation of the
project as has been notified in G.O.M.s. No. 125, dated 31.08.2010, in the best
interest of the wildlife, particularly elephants so as to notify and improve the elephant
corridor.”
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
10

21. The High Court also directed the State to strictly adhere with the provisions of the Scheduled
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 and in case
any forest dwellers are evicted from the elephant corridor, they be provided alternate
accommodation or compensation as per the procedure contemplated under law.
22. A Review Application No. 157 of 2011 was filed against the above decision of the High Court. The
same was dismissed by the High Court vide its order dated 16.11.2011 on the ground that the
impugned judgement was a reasoned order which did not suffer from any error apparent on the face
of the record.
C. Proceedings before this Court
23. During the pendency of the present appeals, this Court was informed that large scale
construction was underway in the elephant corridor in Tamil Nadu. In its order dated 12.07.2018,
this Court had made it clear that no construction is allowed in the elephant corridor in Tamil Nadu
and directed District Collector, Nilgiris to prepare and present a plan of action on how to identify the
constructions that have been made, when they have been made and for what purpose the
constructions are being utilized. This plan of action was to be with respect to the elephant corridors
as mentioned in the Report of the Elephant Task Force titled “Gajah” as well as the elephant
corridor as notified by the impugned G.O.
24. In compliance with this order, the District Collector, Nilgiris filed a Plan of Acton Report which
identified the following constructions in the elephant corridor areas:
Sl.   Nature of the construction           Total    number
No.                                        of
                                           constructions
      Complexes (numbering 39)
      Water Tank, Community Halls, Temple,
      Public Toilet etc.)
                                     Total       821
Specifically in respect of the resorts, the District Collector submitted that all 39 of them were
operating illegally as 27 of them had obtained approvals only for residential purpose whereas 12 of
them had not obtained any approval at all.
25. At the next hearing on 09.08.2018, this Court noted that only advocates on behalf 12 out of the
39 resorts were present before the Court and thus deemed that the remaining 27 resorts had
accepted the Collector’s above-mentioned report. Accordingly, this Court directed that these 27
resorts be closed down/sealed by the Collector and granted 48 hours to the other 12 resorts to
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
11

produce documents showing approvals and title for running of their resorts before the Collector. If
the Collector were to find the documentation incomplete, she was directed to immediately close
down/seal the premises. Further, the non-resort dwellers who were identified by the Collector’s
report to be occupying land in the corridor area, were granted a period of 2 months to produce
necessary documents for verification before the Collector.
26. Thereafter, the District Collector, Nilgiris filed an Action Taken Report dated 23.10.2018 stating
that 27 resorts had been sealed as per this Court’s above direction and documents were received
from the other 12 resorts. The Collector submitted that out of these 12 resorts, only 1 resort owner
could show proof of use of his premises for residential purpose while the remaining 11 resort owners
did not have valid documents. Accordingly, these 11 resorts were also sealed by the Collector in
accordance with the above order of this Court. In this Report, the Collector additionally highlighted
that the Forest Department had directed the sealed resorts to remove solar, electric and barbed wire
fences erected around their premises as the same hinder the free movement of elephants in the
corridor. However, only a few of the resort owners had complied with the Forest Department’s
directive. In this connection, on 24.10.2018, this Court directed that electric fences and barbed wire,
wherever installed by the resort owners, should be removed immediately. The District Collector,
Nilgiris filed another Action Taken Report dated 29.11.2018 reporting that she had ensured removal
of electric fences and barbed wire from the premises of the aforesaid resorts in the corridor area.
27. During this time, in addition to the 12 resorts which were initially represented before this Court,
several other owners of resorts/guest houses as well as the owners of cultivated lands, dwelling
houses and other constructions in and around the elephant corridor area have sought to be
impleaded before us, being aggrieved by the actions of the District Collector, Nilgiris and also the
impugned High Court decision.
D. Contentions of the Parties
28. Appearing for the appellants, Shri Salman Khurshid, learned Senior Counsel argues that the
appellants’ lands do not fall within an elephant corridor and that the area notified under the
impugned G.O. does not fall within any scientifically recognized elephant corridor and seeks to
cover areas which are not traversed by elephants. It is further contended that the identification of
elephant corridors is a scientific process and that the impugned G.O., which was issued in pursuance
of the recommendations of the Expert Committee appointed by the High Court, was erroneous and
untenable in law. The resort owners claim that they run small resorts which are compatible with the
environment and are essentially for tourists who want to be close to nature and wildlife. It is also
asserted that these resorts help tourists acquire sensitivity towards animals and the environment,
while preventing any exploitation or damage by their presence. Some of the other appellants have
also contended that their lands do not fall within the elephant corridor from which the removal of
encroachment was sought.
29. It is further argued that the areas which have been notified as elephant corridor by the State
Government through the impugned G.O., are in variance with all authoritative studies on historic
elephant corridors in Sigur Plateau from 1972 till date. It is also submitted that there is a variance in
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
12

acreage between the recommendations of the Expert Committee formed by the High Court and the
impugned G.O. issued by the State Government. It is contended that the unilateral addition and
deletion of private/Government lands in the said G.O. is arbitrary and illegal. The expansion of the
corridor areas under the G.O. amounts to creation of a new elephant corridor which does not
presently exist and the same is unlawful.
30. Learned counsel for some of the other appellants have made similar submissions. It was argued
that the lands of the appellants do not fall within the elephant corridor. It was also argued that the
Plan of Action Report filed by the District Collector, Nilgiris before this Court is clearly fallacious
and the actions of the District Collector in pursuance thereof are illegal. Some of the appellants have
further alleged that the District Collector, Nilgiris has illegally removed fencing from establishments
outside the notified elephant corridor area as well.
31. On the other hand, learned advocate appearing for the contesting respondents, has sought to
justify the impugned judgment of the High Court, so also the Plan of Action Report and Action
Taken Reports filed by the District Collector, Nilgiris.
32. Learned advocate appearing as Amicus Curiae has supported the submissions of the contesting
respondents and the Reports submitted by the District Collector, Nilgiris.
E. Our Analysis
33. We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel made at the Bar and
perused the materials on record.
34. At the very outset, it must be noted that the Wildlife Trust of India terms elephants as a
“keystone species” because their nomadic behavior is immensely important to the environment.
Herds of roaming elephants play several important roles in the ecosystem:
(i) Landscape architects: Elephants create clearings in the forest as they move about,
preventing the overgrowth of certain plant species and allowing space for the
regeneration of others, which in turn provide sustenance to other herbivorous
animals.
(ii) Seed dispersal: Elephants eat plants, fruits and seeds, releasing the seeds when
they defecate in other places as they travel. This allows for the distribution of various
plant species, which benefits biodiversity.
(iii) Nutrition: Elephant dung provides nourishment to plants and animals and acts
as a breeding ground for insects.
(iv) Food chain: Apex predators like tigers will sometimes hunt young elephants.
Further, elephant carcasses provide food for other animals.
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
13

(v) The umbrella effect: By preserving a large area for elephants to roam freely, one
provides a suitable habitat for many other animal and plant species of an ecosystem.
Elephant corridors allow elephants to continue their nomadic mode of survival, despite shrinking
forest cover, by facilitating travel between distinct forest habitats. Corridors are narrow and linear
patches of forest which establish and facilitate connectivity across habitats. In the context of today’s
world, where habitat fragmentation has become increasingly common, these corridors play a crucial
role in sustaining wildlife by reducing the impact of habitat isolations. In their absence, elephants
would be unable to move freely, which would in turn affect many other animal species and the
ecosystem balance of several wild habitats would be unalterably upset. It would also eventually lead
to the local extinction of elephants, a species which is widely revered in our country and across the
world. To secure wild elephants’ future, it is essential that we ensure their uninterrupted movement
between different forest habitats. For this, elephant corridors must be protected.
35. Legal intervention in preservation of these corridors has been necessitated because wildlife
corridors are threatened by various social, economic and anthropogenic factors, as noted above.
Commercial activities such as running of private resorts and construction of new buildings with
barbed and electric fences within elephant corridors pose a serious threat of fragmentation and
destruction of habitats. The long-term survival of the species depends on maintaining viable
habitats and connecting corridors which maintain variance in the species’ gene pool and avoid other
risks associated with habitat fragmentation and isolation of species.
36. Overtime, several environmental legislations including the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and the
Wildlife Act have been enacted to provide for the protection of forests and wild animals, with a view
to ensuring ecological balance and preserving natural habitats including such corridors. The object
of the Wildlife Act was interpreted emphatically by this Court in State of Bihar v. Murad Ali Khan1
in the following terms:
”8. … The policy and object of the Wild Life laws have a long history and are the
result of an increasing awareness of the compelling need to restore the serious
ecological-imbalances introduced by the depredations inflicted on nature by man.
The state to which the ecological imbalances and the consequent environmental
damage have reached is so alarming that unless immediate, determined and effective
steps were taken, the damage might become irreversible. 1 1988 (4) SCC 655 The
preservation of the fauna and flora some species of which are getting extinct at an
alarming rate, has been a great and urgent necessity for the survival of humanity and
these laws reflect a last-ditch battle for the restoration, in part at least, a grave
situation emerging from a long history of callous insensitiveness to the enormity of
the risks to mankind that go with the deterioration of environment.
xxx xxx xxx
10. … Environmentalists' conception of the ecological balance in nature is based on
the fundamental concept that nature is "a series of complex biotic communities of
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
14

which a man is an inter-dependant part" and that it should not be given to a part to
trespass and diminish the whole. The largest single factor in the depletion of the
wealth of animal life in nature has been the "civilized man" operating directly
through excessive commercial hunting or. more disastrously, indirectly through
invading or destroying natural habitats. ”
37. Specifically in issue before us, is the corridor in the Sigur Plateau of Tamil Nadu. It connects the
Western and the Eastern Ghats and sustains elephant populations and their genetic diversity. The
Sigur Plateau has the Nilgiri Hills on its south- western side and the Moyar River Valley on its
north-eastern side. Depending on the monsoon, the elephants migrate in search of food and water
and during the course of their migration, they have to cross the Sigur Plateau. This migratory path is
considered to be very crucial as it connects several contiguous forest areas forming the Nilgiri
Biosphere Reserve in the states of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala, the largest protected forest
area in India.
38. Conflicting maps of this corridor were presented before the Madras High Court, which thus
directed the State Government to choose between: (i) the elephant corridors identified in the
Wildlife Trust of India’s book titled “Right of Passage – Elephant Corridors of India” which were
referred to by the Central Government in its letter dated 11.08.2006 to the State Government; or (ii)
the single elephant corridor identified by the Expert Committee appointed by the High Court. As per
the aforesaid book titled “Right of Passage”, the following 4 corridors lie in the Sigur Plateau region:
(i) Avarahalla – Sigur, (ii) Kalhatti – Sigur at Glencorin, (iii) Moyar – Avarahalla and (iv) Kalmalai –
Singara and Avarahalla. The Expert Committee examined all the elephant corridors in the area and
identified a single elephant corridor comprising of various elephant corridors in the Sigur Plateau
region. The State Government, vide the impugned G.O., notified this single elephant corridor, along
the lines of the recommendations made by the Expert Committee.
39. The first limb of the appellants’ contentions before us is that there is no statutory power for
creating/recognition of new corridors by the State Government. We do not find merit in this
argument and, in principle, are in agreement with the findings of the High Court regarding the
power of the State Government to take measures, including issuance of the impugned G.O., for
protection of wildlife in Tamil Nadu. It is undeniable that the State Government is empowered to
take measures to protect forests and wildlife falling within its territory in light of Entries 17A ‘Forest’
and 17B ‘Protection of wild animals and birds’ in the concurrent list and the power of the State
Government under the Wildlife Act to notify Sanctuaries and other protected areas. It is an admitted
position that the land of the appellants has also been notified as private forest in 1991 under the
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949, which prohibits cutting of trees in private
forests. Our attention has also been drawn to the decision of this Court in T.N. Godavaraman
Thirumulkpad v. Union of India2 wherein felling of trees in the state of Tamil Nadu was prohibited
in all forests, including forests situated in privately owned lands. The contesting respondents have
argued that the construction of the appellants’ resorts must have necessarily run afoul of the above
decision of this Court. Without commenting on the factual accuracy of this assertion, given that the
classification of the appellants’ land as private forest land is not in dispute here, we find no difficulty
in holding that the State Government was empowered to protect the habitats situated on the
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
15

appellants’ land by notifying an elephant corridor thereupon.
40. Furthermore, since the impugned decision of the High Court, the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change vide its Notification S.O. 4498(E) dated 13.12.2019 has declared the
entire area in question and adjoining areas around the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve as an
Eco-Sensitive Zone. Under this Notification, 2 1997 (2) SCC 267 the State Government of Tamil
Nadu has been expressly directed to regulate land use generally, as well commercial establishment
of hotels/resorts specifically, in the Eco-Sensitive Zone so established. As was held by this Court in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors.3 the “Precautionary Principle” has been accepted as a part of
the law of our land. Articles 21, 47, 48A and 51A(g) of the Constitution of India give a clear mandate
to the State to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the
country. It is the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural environment
including forests and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures. The Precautionary
Principle makes it mandatory for the State Government to anticipate, prevent and attack the causes
of environmental degradation. In this light, we have no hesitation in holding that in order to protect
the elephant population in the Sigur Plateau region, it was necessary and appropriate for the State
Government to limit commercial activity in the areas falling within the elephant corridor.
3 1997 (3) SCC 715
41. The second limb of the appellants’ submissions comprises of questions about the scientific
accuracy of the Expert Committee’s Report and contentions that the dimensions as well as the
location of the single corridor identified therein are at odds with authoritative scientific
publications. It has been argued by the appellants that their resorts and other establishments do not
fall within the historic corridors identified in these publications. These assertions were dealt with by
the High Court which held that there was material on record to show presence of elephants as well
as a past incident of human-elephant conflict, which resulted in the death of a French tourist, in the
region where the appellants’ resorts are located. The High Court also held that any absence of
elephants from the areas surrounding the appellants’ resorts was, in fact, due to the construction
activities of the appellants whereby access of the elephants has been restricted through erection of
electric fencing. We see no reason to interfere with the above factual findings of the High Court and
also do not find fault in the State Government’s adoption of the recommendations of the High
Court-appointed Expert Committee, through the impugned G.O.
42. This brings us to the last limb of the submissions of the appellants, which is comprised of factual
objections to the acreage of the elephant corridor as notified by the impugned G.O. and the actions
taken by the District Collector, Nilgiris in pursuance thereof. The appellants have contended that
there has been substantial variance between the acreage recommended for acquisition by the Expert
Committee Report and the acreage in the impugned G.O. It is further alleged that the acreage in the
newspaper advertisement by the State Government inviting objections to notification of the corridor
is also different from the acreage in the impugned G.O. As all the objections received pursuant to the
said newspaper advertisement were rejected by the State Government and since the impugned G.O.
purported to adopt the recommendations of the Expert Committee, the appellants allege that the
said variance in acreage is arbitrary and unreasonable. It has also been alleged that the District
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
16

Collector, Nilgiris has acted arbitrarily in sealing their resorts after rejecting the documents
submitted by the appellant resorts purporting to show approvals and title. Similarly, it has been
alleged that the District Collector went beyond the scope of this Court’s order dated 24.12.2018
wherein immediate removal of electric fences and barbed wire was directed. It is the appellants’ case
that non-electric fences as well as fences beyond the notified elephant corridor area were removed
by the District Collector. We are of the view that it is just and proper to hold an inquiry to establish
the veracity of the above factual objections of the appellants.
43. Therefore, we appoint a 3-member Inquiry Committee consisting of: (i) Hon’ble Mr. Justice K.
Venkatraman, Former Judge of the Madras High Court (Chairman); (ii) Mr. Ajay Desai, Consultant
to World Wide Fund for Nature-India and Member of the Technical Committee to come up with a
National Elephant Action Plan (NEAP), constituted by the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change (MOEF&CC); and (iii) Mr. Praveen Bhargava, Trustee of Wildlife First and
Former Member of National Board for Wildlife to decide the individual objections of the appellants
and any other persons claiming to be aggrieved by the actions of the District Collector, Nilgiris
pursuant to the impugned G.O. and as recorded before us through her Plan of Action Report and her
twin Action Taken Reports, as also the allegations regarding arbitrary variance in acreage of the
elephant corridor under the impugned G.O. The State Government is directed to consult the
Chairman of the Inquiry Committee and pay remuneration to him and the other Members of the
Inquiry Committee. Further, we direct the State Government to provide appropriate secretarial
assistance and logistical support to the Inquiry Committee for holding the inquiry within four weeks
from today.
44. We leave it to the discretion of the Inquiry Committee to decide the location for its inquiry
proceedings. We also authorize the Inquiry Committee to appoint requisite staff on temporary basis
to assist the Committee in the inquiry and to fix their salaries. The State Government is directed to
pay their salaries. The State Government and the district level authorities are directed to provide
their full cooperation and produce any and all files/documents required by the Inquiry Committee
to address the grievances of the appellants and any other persons claiming to be similarly aggrieved.
The appellants and other persons claiming to be aggrieved by the plan of action/actions of the
District Collector, Nilgiris pursuant to the impugned G.O. and the allegations regarding variance in
acreage under the impugned G.O, are permitted to file objections containing their grievances before
the Inquiry Committee within a period of four months from today. The Inquiry Committee is
directed to consider the objections filed before it and pass appropriate orders thereon after granting
the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard. The parties are also permitted to file documents
in support of their respective contentions before the Inquiry Committee.
45. The present appeals are disposed of in the aforesaid terms, leaving the parties to bear their own
costs. All pending applications shall stand disposed of.
.……………………..…CJI.
(S. A. BOBDE) …..……………………..…J. (S. ABDUL NAZEER) ….…………………………J. (SANJIV
KHANNA) New Delhi;
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
17

October 14, 2020.
Hospitality Association Of Mudumalai vs In Defendent Of Environment And Animals ... on 14 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59422893/
18
