Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4313, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
726
Author: R. Subhash Reddy
Bench: M.R. Shah, R. Subhash Reddy, Ashok Bhushan
Crl.A.No.688 of 2013
                                                                                     REP
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.688 OF 2013
                              Jeet Ram                                                 …
                                                              Versus
                              The Narcotics Control Bureau, Chandigarh               …..
                                                         JUDGMENT
R. Subhash Reddy, J.
1. This appeal is filed by the sole accused, in Sessions Trial No.7- 5/2002 of 2001 on the file of
Sessions Judge, Shimla, aggrieved by the judgment of conviction dated 11.12.2012 and further order
of sentencing the appellant, dated 31.12.2012, passed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh,
Shimla in Criminal Appeal No.493 of 2003.
2. The appellant-accused was tried for a charge punishable under Section 20 of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short, ‘NDPS Act’). The Sessions Judge, Shimla by judgment
dated 30.06.2003 acquitted the accused by recording a finding that the case of Reason: the case of
the prosecution to hold that the accused was found to be in possession of charas, as alleged by the
prosecution.
3. The case as put forth by the prosecution, briefly stated, is as under:
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
1

On 18.06.2001 the Intelligence Officer in the Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB),
Chandigarh, by name – R.P. Singh (PW-4) was proceeding to Theog from Shimla. He
was travelling along with PW-3 – O.P. Bhatt and other officials. In the transit they
stopped at the dhaba to have meals which was near the Nangala Devi Temple. When
they ordered meals and tea and were waiting for the food to be served, the
Intelligence Officer could smell the odour of charas. In the meanwhile, the Zonal
Director of NCB, Chandigarh, by name – Rakesh Goyal, who was examined as PW-1
also reached the said dhaba. Then they have questioned the appellant-accused about
the smell of charas and on such questioning he became nervous. As such there was
increase of suspicion of the NCB officials. On asking the owner of the dhaba, he
disclosed his name to be Jeet Ram and on further questioning he tried to run away.
Then he was apprehended and taken to the counter of the dhaba. Just below the
counter of the dhaba a gunny bag was found. When asked, appellant has replied –
there is nothing in it. Then notice under Section 50 of the NDPS Act was given to the
accused and appellant has consented to search the same by the NCB officials.
Thereafter the bag was searched and the officers have found 13 Kg. of charas. The
charas was divided into two portions of 6½ Kg. each and two packets were made
which were marked as ‘X’ and ‘Y’ respectively. From each of these packets, two
samples of 25 grams were drawn. The samples drawn from the packet – Mark ‘X’ –
were marked as ‘X1’ and ‘X2’ and the samples drawn from packet – Mark ‘Y’ – were
marked as ‘Y1’ and ‘Y2’. Thereafter all the four samples were sealed in a polythene
bag by heat sealing process and were put in paper envelopes and sealed with paper
seals, signed by NCB officials as well as the appellant-accused Jeet Ram. On each
sample seal no.6 of NCB was affixed on all the four corners and the bulk charas in
packets ‘X’ and ‘Y’ was sealed in paper parcels with six seals each. The seals were
handed over to PW-1 and the all the samples and the parcels were signed by NCB
officials and accused. Further, in the statement recorded as contemplated under
Section 67 of the NDPS Act, the appellant has admitted that for various reasons he
was indulged in the trade of charas to increase his income. Thereafter a Panchnama
was drawn which was signed by the appellant and he was arrested on 19.06.2001.
The two samples of ‘X1’ and ‘Y1’ along with a letter were sent through PW-2 Hayat
Singh to Chemical Analyst for analysis, who has vide his report opined that both the
samples were of charas. On the said basis, the appellant-accused was charged and
challaned for the offence under Section 20 of the NDPS Act.
4. When the charge is denied by the appellant-accused, he was tried for the aforesaid offence before
the Sessions Judge, Shimla. To prove the guilt of the appellant, the prosecution has examined four
witnesses in all, in support of its case. On behalf of the accused oral evidence was let in to show that
the dhaba in question was not being run by him and he was employed as a priest in the nearby
temple. After considering the oral and documentary evidence on record, the trial court by judgment
dated 30.06.2003 acquitted the appellant-accused mainly on the grounds that – the prosecution
case was not supported by any independent witness; the prosecution has failed to show that the
seized charas was recovered from the dhaba of the appellant-accused and further there is no
evidence to show that the appellant-accused was found in possession of the charas, as pleaded by
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
2

the prosecution; there was non compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act; as the samples were
handed over to PW-1 Rakesh Goyal who himself gave the sample to PW-2 for carrying the same to
the Central Laboratory at Delhi and these seals remained with the Director, as such the chances of
tampering could not be ruled out and also on the ground that the case of the prosecution was
unnatural and improbable. 5. Aggrieved by the judgment of the trial court, the NCB, Chandigarh has
filed appeal as contemplated under Section 36-B of the NDPS Act read with Section 378 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla in Criminal Appeal
No.493 of 2003. The High Court by reappreciating the evidence on record has come to conclusion
that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt and also has proved that 13 Kg. of
charas was recovered from the possession of the appellant-accused, who was managing the dhaba in
question, and set aside the judgment of the trial court and ordered conviction of the appellant for
offence punishable under Section 20 of the NDPS Act. By further hearing the appellant, order dated
31.12.2012 was passed sentencing the appellant-accused to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 15
years and to pay fine of Rs.2,00,000/- and in default, to undergo further imprisonment of one year.
Aggrieved by the conviction recorded and sentence imposed by the High Court, this appeal is filed
by the accused.
6. We have heard Sri Purushottam Sharma Tripathi, learned counsel for the appellant and Sri Aman
Lekhi, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent-NCB.
7. It is mainly contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the well considered judgment of
the trial court acquitting the appellant from the charge, is reversed by the High Court without
recording cogent reasons. It is submitted that having regard to evidence on record, the view taken by
the trial court was possible view, and even assuming that other view is possible, same is no ground
to interfere with the judgment of the trial court. The learned counsel, in support of this argument,
has placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in the case of Union of India v. Bal Mukund &
Ors. 1; Francis Stanly v. Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau, Thiruvananthapuram2; and
Rangaiah v. State of Karnataka3. Further it was contended that the story of the prosecution is not
supported by independent witnesses though it is clear from the evidence on record that the houses
in the village were only at a 1 (2009) 12 SCC 161 2 (2006) 13 SCC 210 3 (2008) 16 SCC 737 distance
of 500 meters from the place of dhaba. He submitted that the High Court has committed error in
relying on the testimony of official witnesses to hold the appellant-accused guilty of the charge.
While pleading that it is not safe to rely on the testimony of official witnesses, in absence of any
independent witness, learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in the case
of Jagdish v. State of M.P.4 and Gyan Singh & Ors. v. State of U.P. 5. It is also the submission of the
learned counsel that there is no acceptable evidence on record to hold that appellant-accused was in
exclusive and conscious possession of the seized material /charas as much as same was seized from
the gunny bag lying near the counter of the dhaba. In support of the said plea, the learned counsel
relied upon the judgments of this Court in the case of Gopal v. State of M.P.6 and State of Punjab v.
Balkar Singh & Anr.7. Further it is also stated that search notice issued to the appellant was not in
accordance with Section 50 of the NDPS Act and placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in the
case of K. Mohanan v. State of Kerala8. Further pleading that the testimony of the defence witness
was not considered in proper perspective by the High Court, the learned counsel has submitted that
it is a fit case to set aside the judgment of the High Court and acquit the appellant from the charge
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
3

framed. Lastly it is contended by the learned counsel that in any event the sentence of 15 years’
rigorous imprisonment with fine of 4 (2003) 9 SCC 159 5 1995 Supp. (4) 658 6 (2002) 9 SCC 595 7
(2004) 3 SCC 582 8 (2000) 10 SCC 222 Rs.2,00,000/- is excessive and disproportionate to the
gravity of the charge having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and the age of the
appellant. Further it is submitted that he is a pujari in the temple, situated near the dhaba.
8. On the other hand, it is argued by Sri Aman Lekhi, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing
for the respondent-NCB, that the findings recorded by the trial court are erroneous and contrary to
evidence on record, as such, it is always open to the High Court in appeal to reappreciate the
evidence and set aside such erroneous view taken by the trial court. It is submitted that though
prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt, on mere surmises and presumptions the
trial court has found that the case of the prosecution is unnatural and same is correctly overturned
by the High Court. Further it is submitted that the incident had happened at about 10:30 p.m. at the
dhaba which is away from the actual village site, as such, merely because independent witnesses
were not examined, same by itself is no ground to reject the case of the prosecution. Further it is
submitted that it is admitted position that dhaba was being run by his wife, which is near to the
temple. As the appellant was on the counter during the relevant time, as such, it cannot be said that
the seized material of charas was not seized from his conscious possession. To support various
contentions learned Additional Solicitor General relied on the several judgments of this Court.
o To support his contention that appellate courts have full powers to review the evidence, upon
which order of acquittal is founded and come to their own conclusion, he relied on the following
judgments :
1. Sanwat Singh & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan9
2. Damodarprasad Chandrikaprasad v. State of Maharashtra10
3. Vinod Kumar v. State of Haryana11 o In support of his contention that merely
because independent witnesses are not examined, same is no ground to reject the
case of the prosecution, learned Additional Solicitor General has relied on the
following judgments of this Court :
1. Dharampal Singh v. State of Punjab12
2. Baldev Singh v. State of Haryana13 o To support his argument that the charas was
seized from the conscious possession of the appellant, the learned ASG has placed
reliance on the following judgments of this Court :
1. Madan Lal & Anr. v. State of H.P.14
2. Mohan Lal v. State of Rajasthan15
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
4

9 (1961) 3 SCR 120 10 (1972) 1 SCC 107 11 (2015) 3 SCC 138 12 (2010) 9 SCC 608 13 (2015) 17 SCC
554 14 (2003) 7 SCC 465 15 (2015) 6 SCC 222 Further, it is submitted that having regard to the
nature of offence which has large repercussions on the society, sentence imposed does not warrant
any interference. Hence, prayed for dismissal of the appeal.
9. Having heard the learned counsel on both sides and on perusal of the record, we do not find any
substance in any of the contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant, except the
submission on the quantum of sentence.
10. It is mainly contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the High Court / appellate Court
was not justified in interfering with the judgment of acquittal passed by the trial court merely
because another view is possible. As noted earlier, in support of his argument that merely because
another view is possible, same is no ground to interfere with the judgment of acquittal by the
appellate court, the learned counsel has relied on judgments of this Court in the case of Bal
Mukund1; Francis Stanly2; and Rangaiah3. To counter the said submission, the learned Additional
Solicitor General Sri Aman Lekhi has submitted that it is always open to the appellate court to
review the evidence on record upon which order of acquittal is founded and if it comes to conclusion
that the order passed by the trial court is erroneous and unreasonable, it is always open for the
appellate court to interfere with the order of acquittal. It is contended that the view taken by the trial
court is not a possible view having regard to evidence on record. Such erroneous finding can be
corrected by the appellate court. In support of his argument, the learned Additional Solicitor
General has placed reliance on the judgments of this Court in the case of Sanwat Singh9;
Damodarprasad Chandrikaprasad10 and Vinod Kumar11. Though the ratio laid down in the
judgments relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the appellate court would not
interfere with the judgment of acquittal only because another view is possible but at the same time
whether the findings recorded by the trial court in support of acquittal are valid or not is a matter
which is to be considered with reference to facts of each case and evidence on record. On close
scrutiny of the depositions of the witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution as well as on
behalf of the accused, we are of the view that the findings recorded by the trial court are contrary to
evidence on record and view taken by the trial court was not possible at all, as such the High Court
rightly interfered with the same and recorded its own findings to convict the appellant. The trial
court acquitted the appellant mainly on the ground that prosecution case was not supported by
independent witnesses; conscious possession was not proved; non-compliance of Section 50 of the
NDPS Act; proper procedure was not followed in sending the samples for examination and the case
of the prosecution was unnatural and improbable. As rightly held by the High Court, this Court in
the case of State of H.P. v. Pawan Kumar16 has held that Section 50 of the NDPS Act is applicable
only in the case of personal search, as such, there is no basis for the findings recorded by the trial
court that there was non-compliance of provision under Section 50 of the 16 (2005) 4 SCC 350
NDPS Act. Even with regard to the finding of the trial court that the case of the prosecution was not
supported by independent witnesses, it is clear from the evidence on record that the incident had
happened at about 10:30 p.m. in a dhaba which is away from the village site and all other persons
who are found in the dhaba were the servants of the accused. It is also clear from the evidence on
record that Suresh Kumar and Attar Singh examined on behalf of the appellant are closely related to
the accused, as such, they could not be said to be independent witnesses. Pappu was the only other
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
5

person who is none other than the servant of the dhaba and we cannot expect such a person to be a
witness against his own master. Dealing with the issue of conscious possession, it is to be noticed
that dhaba is constructed on the land which belongs to Kaushalya Devi who is none other than the
wife of the accused. Further in deposition PW-4 has stated that when the accused was questioned as
to who was the owner of the dhaba, he claimed to be the owner. The case of the prosecution was
found to be unnatural and improbable by the trial court only on the ground that 13 Kg. of charas was
lying in open in a gunny bag. The trial court found that it is not believable that any person would
keep such a huge quantity of charas in open condition. It is clear from the evidence of prosecution
witnesses that the officials of NCB got information that trafficking of charas was going on in the area
in question. Two police parties had left for Theog – one party headed by PW-4 R.P. Singh started
earlier and second party headed by PW-1 Rakesh Goyal left a little later from Shimla. Thus the
depositions of PW-4 R.P. Singh; PW-3 O.P. Bhat; PW-1 Rakesh Goyal and PW-2 Hayat Singh are
consistent and trustworthy and cannot be said to be unnatural and improbable. Further it is also to
be noted that the trial court has held that seal with which samples and remaining bulk of charas was
sealed was handed over to PW-1 Rakesh Goyal who himself gave the sample to PW-2 for carrying to
Central Laboratory at Delhi and since the seals remained with the Director, the chances of
tampering could not be ruled out. In this regard, it is to be noticed, as rightly held by the High Court,
that the trial court totally lost sight of the fact that on 19.06.2001 JMIC, Theog had also appended
his signatures on the samples as well as bulk parcels and, therefore, there was no chance of
tampering of the samples. Further, there was no such suggestion of tampering either put to PW-1
Rakesh Goyal or to PW-2 Hayat Singh.
11. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the clear view that the view taken by the trial court was not at
all possible, having regard to the evidence on record and findings which are erroneously recorded
contrary to evidence on record were rightly set aside by the High Court. As submitted by the learned
Additional Solicitor General appearing for the prosecution, it is always open to the appellate court to
reappreciate the evidence, on which the order of acquittal is founded, and appellate courts are
vested with the powers to review and come to their own conclusion. The judgments in the case of
Sanwat Singh9; Damodarprasad Chandrikaprasad10 and Vinod Kumar11 also support the case of
the respondent. It is relevant to refer to paragraphs 17 and 18 of the judgment in the case of Vinod
Kumar11 which read as under :
“17. Before we dwell upon the factual score whether the prosecution has proven the
case to warrant a conviction, we think it apt to recapitulate the principles relating to
the jurisdiction of the High Court while deciding the appeal against acquittal. In this
context, reproducing a passage from Jadunath Singh v. State of U.P. [(1971) 3 SCC
577 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 726] would be profitable:
(SCC p. 582, para 22) “22. This Court has consistently taken the view that in an
appeal against acquittal the High Court has full power to review at large all the
evidence and to reach the conclusion that upon that evidence the order of acquittal
should be reversed. This power of the appellate court in an appeal against acquittal
was formulated by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Sheo Swarup v.
King Emperor [(1933-34) 61 IA 398 : (1934) 40 LW 436 : AIR 1934 PC 227 (2)] and
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
6

Nur Mohammed v. King Emperor [(1945) 58 LW 481 : AIR 1945 PC 151] . These two
decisions have been consistently referred to in the judgments of this Court as laying
down the true scope of the power of an appellate court in hearing criminal appeals:
see Surajpal Singh v. State [AIR 1952 SC 52 : 1952 Cri LJ 331] and Sanwat Singh v.
State of Rajasthan [AIR 1961 SC 715 : (1961) 1 Cri LJ 766] .” Similar view has been
expressed in Damodarprasad Chandrikaprasad v. State of Maharashtra [(1972) 1 SCC
107 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 110] , Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2
SCC 793 :
1973 SCC (Cri) 1033] , State of Karnataka v. K. Gopalakrishna [(2005) 9 SCC 291 :
2005 SCC (Cri) 1237], Anil Kumar v. State of U.P. [(2004) 13 SCC 257 :
2005 SCC (Cri) 178] , Girja Prasad v. State of M.P. [(2007) 7 SCC 625 : (2007) 3 SCC
(Cri) 475] and S. Ganesan v. Rama Raghuraman [(2011) 2 SCC 83 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cri)
607] .
18. In this regard, we may fruitfully remind ourselves the principles culled out in
Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka [(2007) 4 SCC 415 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 325] : (SCC
p. 432, para 42) “42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following
general principles regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an
appeal against an order of acquittal emerge:
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach
its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, ‘substantial and compelling reasons’, ‘good and
sufficient grounds’, ‘very strong circumstances’, ‘distorted conclusions’, ‘glaring
mistakes’, etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an
appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of ‘flourishes of
language’ to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal
than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own
conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence is
available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent
court of law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of
his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
7

(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record,
the appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial
court.” For the aforesaid reasons, we reject the submission made by the learned
counsel for the appellant. Even with regard to the plea of the appellant that the
evidence on record on behalf of the prosecution is not sufficient enough to hold that
the appellant-accused was in conscious possession of the seized material, also cannot
be accepted. It is clear from the evidence on record that the appellant was on the
counter of the dhaba which was constructed on the land owned by his wife near the
temple and the charas was found in the counter of the dhaba in a gunny bag. The
facts of the case show that accused not only had direct physical control over charas,
he had the knowledge of its presence and character. As rightly contended by Sri
Aman Lekhi, learned Additional Solicitor General in the case of Mohan Lal15 this
Court had held that a functional and flexible approach in defining and understanding
possession as a concept has to be adopted and the word has to be understood keeping
in mind the purpose and object of the enactment. In the statement recorded under
Section 313 of Code of Criminal Procedure, though the appellant has referred to Brij
Lal and Mantu in support of a version, contrary to that presented by prosecution but
he has not chosen to examine either Brij Lal or Mantu. No defence witness has
deposed to the chain of events, as has been stated by the appellant in the statement
under Section 313, Cr.PC. It is also fairly well settled that where accused offers false
answers in examination under Section 313 Cr.PC, same also can be used against him.
Further onus was on the appellant to explain the possession and in absence of the
same being discharged, presumption under Section 54 of the NDPS Act also will kick
in.
12. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the judgment of the High Court does not suffer
from any infirmity so as to interfere with the judgment of conviction.
13. At the same time we find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant in
sentencing the appellant for 15 years’ rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.2,00,000/-. Having
regard to peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and in view of the fact that the incident
occurred in the year 2001 and as the appellant claimed to be a priest in the temple, who is now aged
about 65 years, we deem it appropriate that it is a fit case to modify the sentence imposed on the
appellant. Accordingly, the sentence awarded on the appellant is reduced to a period of 10 (ten)
years, while maintaining the conviction and the penalty as imposed by the High Court. The order of
sentence dated 31.12.2012 passed by the High Court stands modified. The appeal is partly allowed to
the extent indicated above.
………….………………………………...J. [ASHOK BHUSHAN] ….…………………………………………J. [R.
SUBHASH REDDY] ….…………………………………………J. [M.R. SHAH] New Delhi.
September 15, 2020.
Jeet Ram vs The Narcotics Control Bureau, ... on 15 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184216351/
8
