Jugut Ram vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 September, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4395, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
729
Author: Navin Sinha
Bench: Indira Banerjee, Navin Sinha, R.F. Nariman
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 616 OF 2020
                            (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.7416 of 2018)
         JUGUT RAM                                              ...APPELLANT(S)
                                              VERSUS
         THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                              ..RESPONDENT(S)
                                             JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
2. The appellant assails his conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (in short, “IPC”)
and the consequent sentence of life imprisonment, upheld by the High Court.
3. Ms. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant, submits that all the four witnesses are
related to the deceased. The two independent witnesses were not examined. The serological report
with regard to the blood group of the deceased matching that alleged to have been found on the lathi
have not been established. The recovery of the lathi has not been properly proved. The deceased did
not die immediately, but succumbed to the injuries in the hospital. The assault was at spur of the
moment with no premeditation. The appellant had also suffered injuries.
4. Learned counsel for the State, Sri Sourav Roy opposing the appeal submits that the deceased was
in possession of the field. The appellant was the aggressor. The deceased succumbed on the spot.
The intention to cause death is apparent from the assault made on the head, a sensitive part of the
human body. The appellant cannot urge to have acted in self defence as he was the aggressor. He
relies on State of A.P. vs. S. Rayappa, (2006) 4 SCC 512 and Laltu Ghosh vs. State of West Bengal
Jugut Ram vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143746138/
1

(2019) 15 SCC 344, to contend that the evidence of related witnesses cannot be discarded.
5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length. There existed a civil land dispute between
the parties. The occurrence is stated to have taken place on 23.11.2001 at about 02.00 P.M. while the
deceased was harvesting crops. The appellant assaulted him with a lathi on the head. The deceased
expired in the hospital the next day at about 07.45 P.M. The post mortem report proved by the
Doctor, P.W. 13 found two contusions on the left and right parietal portion and fracture on the left
parietal bone opining it to be dangerous to life. Other injured witnesses have confirmed that the
appellant also suffered injuries in the occurrence.
6. The High Court on appreciation of evidence has come to the conclusion that the assault was not
premeditated but had taken place in a heat of passion due to a land dispute. If the appellant had the
intention, nothing prevented him from further assaulting the deceased. Nonetheless it maintained
the sentence of the appellant under Section 302, IPC because death had taken place pursuant to the
assault by him.
7. A lathi is a common item carried by a villager in this country, linked to his identity. The fact that it
is also capable of being used as a weapon of assault, does not make it a weapon of assault
simpliciter. In a case like the present, of an assault on the head with a lathi, it is always a question
fact in each case whether there was intention to cause death or only knowledge that death was likely
to occur. The circumstances, manner of assault, nature and number of injuries will all have to be
considered cumulatively to decipher the intention or knowledge as the case may be. We do not
consider it necessary to dilate on the first principles laid down in this regard in Virsa Singh vs. The
State of Punjab, 1958 SCR 1495, which stand well established. Suffice it to notice from precedents
that in Joseph vs. State of Kerala, (1995) SCC (Crl.) 165, the appellant dealt two blows on the head of
the deceased. The deceased died two days later. The post mortem report found lacerated injury on
the head and internal examination revealed fracture to the occipital bone extended up to the
temporal bone. The High Court convicted the appellant under Section 302 IPC holding that the
injury caused by the lathi was sufficient to cause death of the deceased. This Court observed as
follows:
“3. ….The weapon used is not a deadly weapon as rightly contended by the learned
counsel. The whole occurrence was a result of a trivial incident and in those
circumstances the accused dealt two blows on the head with a lathi, therefore, it
cannot be stated that he intended to cause the injury which is sufficient (sic). At the
most it can be said that by inflicting such injuries he had knowledge that he was likely
to cause the death. In which case the offence committed by him would be culpable
homicide not amounting to murder. We accordingly set aside the conviction of the
appellant under Section 302 IPC and the sentence of imprisonment for life awarded
thereunder. Instead we convict the appellant under Section 304 Part II IPC and
sentence him to five years’ RI.”
8. In Chamru Budhwa vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 652, the appellant dealt a blow on
the head of the deceased with a lathi and which proved fatal. The injury was medically opined
Jugut Ram vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143746138/
2

sufficient in the ordinary course to cause death. Conviction under Section 302, IPC followed. This
court observed as follows:
“5. It now remains to consider whether the offence which he committed falls within
the first part or the second part of Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code. When the
fatal injury was inflicted by the appellant on the head of the deceased by only one
blow given in the manner alleged by the prosecution it could as well be that the act by
which death was caused was not done with the intention of causing death or of
causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. The act appears to have been
done with the knowledge that it was likely to cause death, but without any intention
to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death within the
meaning of Part II of Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code.
6. We accordingly allow the appeal to this extent that the conviction of the appellant
under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence of transportation for
life awarded to him will be set aside, but the appellant will be convicted of having
committed the offence under Section 304 Part II of the Indian Penal Code and will be
sentenced to seven years’ rigorous imprisonment.”
9. In Gurmukh Singh vs. State of Haryana, (2009) 15 SCC 635, the deceased died three days later
after an assault on the head with a lathi opined to be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death. Holding that the assault was made on the spur of the moment without premeditation
the conviction was altered from one under Section 302 to Section 304 Part II and a sentence of
seven years was handed. Similarly in Mohd. Shakeel vs. State of A.P., (2007) 3 SCC 119, the
appellant had caused only one injury and had suffered injury himself also. Altering the conviction
from under Section 302 IPC to 304 Part II, the appellant was sentenced to the period undergone
since 1999.
10. We do not consider that Laltu Ghosh (supra) and S. Rayappa (supra), with regard to credibility
of related witnesses, have any relevance to the issue in question being decided by us.
11. We accordingly alter the conviction of the appellant from Section 302 IPC to Section 304 Part II,
IPC. The appellant is in custody since 2004. He has already undergone the maximum period of
sentence prescribed under the same. The appellant is, therefore, directed to be set at liberty
forthwith unless wanted in any other case.
12. The appeal is allowed.
…………...................J. [R.F. NARIMAN] …………...................J. [NAVIN SINHA] …………...................J.
[INDIRA BANERJEE] NEW DELHI SEPTEMBER 16, 2020
Jugut Ram vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143746138/
3
