Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2023, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
478
Author: A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench: Dinesh Maheshwari, A.M. Khanwilkar
                                                    1
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 414 OF 2020
                               (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 9876 of 2018)
          Kanwal Tanuj                                             ….Appellant(s)
                                                Versus
          State of Bihar & Ors.                                    ….Respondent(s)
                                           JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal emanates from the judgment and order dated 17.9.2018 passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna (for short, “the High Court”) in Criminal Writ Jurisdiction Case (CWJC) No.
879/2018, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant for quashing of first information report
(FIR) being R.C. A.C.−I, 2018A 0002 dated 21.2.2018 registered by the Central Bureau of
Investigation (for short, “the CBI”) under Sections 120B, 420, 467, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal
Code (for short, “the IPC”) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for
short, “the PC Act”) came to be rejected.
3. The principal ground canvassed by the appellant before the High Court was that he being an
officer of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) employed in connection with the affairs of the
Government of Bihar as District Magistrate at Aurangabad District (State of Bihar) could not be
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
1

subjected to investigation by the CBI without the prior consent of the State.
4. The appellant has been named as an accused alongwith one Shri C. Sivakumar, CEO, Bhartiya
Rail Bijli Company Limited (for short, “BRBCL”), Nabinagar, District Aurangabad, Bihar on the
basis of FIR registered by the CBI pursuant to information received from a reliable source alleging
as follows: − “A reliable source information has been received that Bhartiya Rail Bijlee Company
Limited (BRBCL), a subsidiary of NTPC Ltd. is constructing four units of 250 MW at Nabinagar in
Aurangabad District (Bihar). The joint venture project has been developed by Bhartiya Rail Bijlee
Company Limited (BRBCL) with NTPC having 74 percent share, while the Ministry of Railways with
the remaining 26 percent. Indian Railways would get 90 percent and the state of Bihar would get ten
percent of the power generated from BRBCL’s plants. The construction work of BRBCL was
proposed in the 2005−06 Union Budget and the Central Govt. approved the company in February
2007 but work on the plant was delayed due to land acquisition problems at Nabinagar. Actual work
on BRBCL power plants started in 2008−09. The four units of BRBCL plant are proposed to be
constructed on around 1,500 acres of land at Nabinagar and all of them are to be completed at a
revised cost of around Rs.8,100 crore.
2. Information further revealed that large scale corruption and siphoning of government funds has
taken place in the land acquisition for the plant of Bhartiya Rail Bijlee Company Limited (BRBCL)
by the BRBCL officials in criminat connivance with Local District Administration. A specific
instance has been formed by source in this regard pertaining to acquisition of tL.57 acre land of
Khata No.12, plot No.1, of Mauja Kajrine for the Thermal Power Project at Nabinagar in the District
of Aurangabad (Bihar). The proposal to acquire land has already been approved by the State
Government of Bihar along with the compensation amount payable to the owner of the acquired
lands.
3. Information also revealed that initially vide letter No.452, dated 22.06.2015, Circle Officer,
Nabinagar informed Chief Executive Officer, BRBCL, Nabinagar that there was no claimant for land
7.09 acre pertaining to Khata No.12, plot No.1 of Mauja Kajrine. In this regard BRBCL issued a letter
to Circle Officer, Nabinagar on 15.01.2016 that company had no objection if aforesaid left out land
was transferred to company (BRBCL).
4. It has been further revealed by a source that Shri C. Shiv Kumar, CEO, BRBCL, Nabinagar entered
into a criminal conspiracy with Shri Kanwal Tanuj, District Magistrate, Aurangabad District (Bihar),
other unknown officers/officials of BRBCL, local District Administration and Shri Gopal prasad
singh (now deceased). In furtherance of the said criminal conspiracy, Shri Kanwal Tanuj, District
Magistrate, Aurangabad District (Bihar) got false documents of Khata No.12, plot No.1 of Mauja
Kajrine prepared in respect of one shri Gopal prasad singh (now deceased) s/o Late Kesho Prasad
singh, R/o− Nabinagar District− Aurangabad (Bihar). Some false receipts of Lagan for the period
1988−89 to 2016−17, some other related papers/returns of above land shown to be purchased from
Shri Mukund Lal (Jamindar), who was never jamindar (Land lord) of the area were prepared and
submitted for claim/compensation in the name of Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased).
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
2

5. It was then fraudulently directed by Shri Kanwal Tanuj, DM, Aurangabad that 7.45 acre land in
Khata No.12, Plot No.1 of Mauja Kajrine be recorded in the name of Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now
deceased) and the matter may be further processed accordingly. Circle Officer, Nabinagar sent a
letter No.74, dated 11.03.2017 to Chief− Executive officer BRBCL for purchasing of the land from the
owner Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased), Circle Officer, Nabinagar thereafter issued another
letter dated 25.03.2017 to BRBCL recalling his previous letter dated 22.06.2015 and informed that
7.45 acres out of the total land in Khata No.12, plot No.1 of Mauja Kajrine has been registered in
name of Shri Gopal Prasad Singh. The circle officer further informed BRBCL that 6.545 acres falling
in the Ash Dyke area in the above mentioned plot was being earmarked/acquired for the BRBCL and
directed the BRBCL to purchase the said land from the owner Shri Gopal Prasad Singh and 0.905
acres from the Govt. Land was being transferred to BRBCL for the purpose of the plant.
6. Source information also revealed that as per procedure possession of land is taken in the presence
of land owners after identification of their land but when BRBCL officers along with other officers
visited the site on 11 & 12.04.2017 for possession of the aforesaid land, the claimant Gopal prasad
singh (now deceased) allegedly could not identify his own land and many villagers, who gathered
there opposed that the said land was not owned by Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased). In this
regard a video/CD was also prepared at the spot. In furtherance of the conspiracy, vide letter 1707
dated 26.05.2017 Shri Kanwal Tanuj, DM, Aurangabad thereafter directed BRBCL to make payment
of compensation for the land (Khata No.12, Plot No.1, of Mauja Kajrine) to Gopal Prasad Singh (now
deceased) within 48 hours. Vide letter No.151, dated 12.06.2017 Shri C. Shiv Kumar, CEO, BRBCL,
Nabinagar made payment of Rs.2,07,84,583/− to Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased) despite
having the knowledge that Shri Gopal Prasad Singh could not identify the land and many villagers
who had gathered there opposed that the said land was not owned by Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now
deceased).
7. Source has further informed that an a/c. Payee Cheque No.382774, dated 29.05.2017 for
Rs.2,07,84,583/− was issued from account No.30450307785 by Bhartiya Rail Bijlee Co. Ltd. in
favour of Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased) and same was credited in a/c number
6082000100097579 of Shri Gopal Prasad Singh (now deceased) maintained in SBI, Nabinagar
branch, District−Aurangabad (Bihar). This amount was transferred via RTGS/SBINR520170529 in
this account and subsequently the money was withdrawn. Thus, BRBCL was caused a wrongful loss
to the tune of Rs.2,07,84,5831− and corresponding wrongful gain to themselves.
8. The above facts and circumstances prima−facie disclose commission of offences punishable U/s.
120−B, 420, 467, 468 & 471 IPC and Section 73(2) r/w Section 13 (1) (d) of the P.C. Act, 1988 against
Shri C. Shiv Kumar, CEO, BRBCL Nabinagar, Shri Kanwal Tanuj, DM, Aurangabad and other
unknown public servants of BRBCL and local administration and other private persons.
A Regular case is, therefore, registered and entrusted to Shri Pramod Kumar, Dy. Supdt. of police
CBI, AC−I, New Delhi Supdt. of Police, CBI/AC−I, New Delhi for investigation and report.”
5. As aforesaid, the appellant filed writ petition for quashing of the said FIR on the ground that it
does not disclose any criminal offence against the appellant and for a declaration that it has been
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
3

lodged against the appellant (a State Government employee), without prior permission of the State
Government and was thus in violation of Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
1946 (for short, “the 1946 Act”). In other words, the FIR has been registered without jurisdiction
and is void ab initio.
6. The High Court after considering the grounds of challenge, proceeded to hold that BRBCL is an
“affiliate” or “associate” in relation to National Thermal Power Company (NTPC) Ltd. and the
Railways respectively. The registered office of BRBCL was in the Union Territory of Delhi (National
Capital Territory of Delhi) and the allegation regarding defrauding the said undertaking (BRBCL)
and siphoning of funds had occurred in the Union Territory of Delhi (National Capital Territory of
Delhi). The funds for implementation of the project through BRBCL were provided by the Central
Government in terms of the Union Budget proposed in the year 2005−06. The High Court then
concluded that criminal conspiracy for committing the offence was thus hatched at Delhi and for all
these reasons, the CBI was competent to register FIR at Delhi and to carry on investigation in that
regard. Additionally, the High Court referred to the notification dated 19.2.1996 issued by the State
Government of Bihar according consent to all members of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
(for short, “the DSPE”) to exercise powers and jurisdiction under the 1946 Act in the whole of the
State of Bihar in respect of the stated offences. The said notification reads thus: − “NO.3/Vividh−
6019/96 Government of Bihar Home (Police) Department Notification Patna the February, 1996
O.O. No.____________/− In exercise of the powers conferred by section 6 of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act. 1945 (Act XXV of 1945), and in supersession of all previous notifications
on the subject the Governor of Bihar is pleased to accord his consent to all members of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment to exercise powers and jurisdiction under the said Act in whole of the
State of Bihar in respect of the investigation of the followings:−
(a) Offences committed in connection with the affairs of the Govt. of India, Local authority subject
to the control of the Government of India or any corporation, company or Bank owned or controlled
by the Govt. of India.
(i) punishable under the prevention of corruption Act, 1947 (Act 2 of 1947);
(ii) punishable under Section 403, 406, 407, 408, 409, 411, 412, 413, 414, 417, 418, 419, 420, 465,
466, 467, 468, 471 and 477−A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); and
(iii) attempts, abetments and conspiracies in relation to, or in connection with the offences
mentioned in clause (i) and (ii) above any other offence committed in the course of the same
transaction arising out of the same facts.
(b) offences punishable under the Central Acts specified in the Annexure appended hereto, Provided
that where public servants employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar and
persons employed in connection with the affairs of any local authority subject to the control of the
Government of Bihar or any corporation, company or Bank owned or controlled by the Government
of Bihar or any institution receiving or having received any financial aid from the Government of
Bihar are concerned in offences referred to in items a(i) to (iii) and (b) above, the prior consent of
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
4

the State Government shall be obtained for the investigation of any such offence by the Delhi Special
Police Establishment.
File No.1/Vividh−6019/96) By order of Governor of Bihar Sd/−−− (D.P. Maheshwari)
Commissioner & Secretary Home Department” The High Court negatived the argument of the
appellant that the proviso in the said notification restricted the general consent accorded by the
State. It was urged by the appellant that the purport of the proviso was to make it amply clear that
no consent was given by the State Government in terms of Section 6 of the 1946 Act to authorise the
members of the DSPE to exercise powers and jurisdiction under the 1946 Act in respect of offences
in which public servants employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar were
allegedly involved. Investigation in respect of such cases could be undertaken only after taking prior
consent of the State Government of Bihar and not otherwise.
7. The High Court noted that it was not the case of the appellant that the offences referred to in the
subject FIR were not covered by the notification issued by the Central Government in terms of
Section 3 of the 1946 Act. The High Court held that the investigation in the present case had begun
in respect of affairs of an agent of a public sector undertaking and the Central Government through
Ministry of Railways with regard to siphoning of funds by the agent entering into a criminal
conspiracy with some persons who incidentally reside outside the Union Territory. Investigation qua
them could be proceeded by the CBI without the consent of the concerned State Government where
the co−accused resided. The High Court in paragraphs 46 and 48 noted thus: − “46. Once the
offences or the classes of offences are covered under the notification issued by the Central
Government in terms of Section 3 and the offences alleged are said to be in respect of the funds of
the government being siphoned through its agent which is a corporate body and a government
company through its Chief Executive Officer and the registered office of the said corporate body is in
the Union Territory of Delhi, the institution of the FIR as well as the investigation taken up pursuant
thereto cannot be stopped and no consent of the government of Bihar would be required to
investigate the persons involved in commission of the offence. Such person may be an officer
working in connection with the affairs of the State of Bihar, but where the offences alleged are in
connection with the funds of the Government of India through its agent a government company
having its registered office at Union Territory of Delhi, it would be immaterial that any other person
involved in commission of the said offence is working in connection with the affairs of the State
Government. In the facts of the present case, this Court is of the considered opinion that no consent
of the State Government in terms of Section 6 of the DSPE Act, 1946 would be required.
xxx xxx xxx
48. Even though learned Senior counsel representing the petitioner submits that in the present case
the B.R.B.C.L. cannot be said to be a company owned or controlled by the Central Government, this
Court is of the considered opinion that first part of the notification dated 19.02.1996 in so far as it
states that the consent of the government is in respect of the investigation of the offence committed
in connection with the affairs of the Government of India, local authority subject to the control of
the Government of India, local authority subject to the control of the Government of India or any
Corporation, Company or Bank owned and controlled by the Government of India cannot be given a
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
5

narrow meaning.” While dealing with the proviso in the subject notification dated 19.2.1996, the
High Court in paragraphs 57 and 58 observed thus:− “57. The proviso to the notification dated
19.02.1996 issued by the Government of Bihar cannot come to the rescue of the petitioner in the
present set of facts and circumstances where the C.B.I. while investigating a case involving a
government company who is acting as an agent of the public sector undertaking and Ministry of
Railways finds that some more persons including those who are public servants presently working
and serving under the Government of Bihar are also involved in the conspiracy which has an
ultimate effect of causing unlawful loss to the principal for which the agent is working, no individual
consent would be required in terms of Section 6 of the D.S.P.E. Act.
58. The contention of the learned Senior Counsel based on the proviso part of the notification dated
19.02.1996 could have been worth consideration if it could have been shown to this Court that the
entire alleged offence in respect of which the C.B.I. has assumed jurisdiction to investigate relate to
an affairs of the State of Bihar. This Court would, therefore, reiterate that in the facts situation of the
present case no consent at all would be required from the Government of Bihar.” The High Court
accordingly rejected the challenge put forth by the appellant and dismissed the writ petition being
devoid of merit.
8. The appellant has reiterated the grounds urged before the High Court and would contend that
CBI could not have registered the FIR much less investigated the same without prior consent of the
State of Bihar in that regard. The notification dated 19.2.1996 does not authorise the CBI to register
cases against the public servants employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of
Bihar. In support of this submission, reliance has been placed on the decisions in State of West
Bengal & Ors. vs. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal & Ors.1, Ms.
Mayawati vs. Union of India & Ors. 2 and M. Balakrishna Reddy vs. Director, Central Bureau of
Investigation, New Delhi3. It is urged that the interpretation by the High Court regarding the
purport of the subject notification dated 19.2.1996 is flawed; and, is in teeth of the express
stipulation in the proviso thereof. It is urged that any other view would result in impacting the
federal structure of the country, which is the basic feature of the Constitution of India. Further, the
general consent accorded by the State of Bihar vide stated notification is a conditional one for
exercise of powers and 1 (2010) 3 SCC 571 2 (2012) 8 SCC 106 3 (2008) 4 SCC 409 jurisdiction by
the officials of the DSPE. The appellant has drawn our attention to the expression “may” used in
Sections 3 and 5 of the 1946 Act in contradistinction to the expression “shall” in Section 6 and would
urge that the requirement of prior unambiguous consent of the State Government is the pre−
requisite and sine qua non to empower the officials of the DSPE. The appellant has also pointed out
that the nature of allegation in the FIR against the appellant disregards the factual background in
which the declaration in favour of Gopal Prasad Singh regarding the land bearing Khata No. 12, Plot
number 1 of Mauja Kajrain was issued after due evaluation of his claim in the hierarchy of
administrative set up right from Anchal Amin upto Additional District Magistrate, which process
went on from 1971 as is manifest from the official record. It is thus urged that the alleged act of the
appellant was done in official capacity and was protected by Section 79 of the IPC. The CBI ought to
have undertaken preliminary enquiry before rushing to register the FIR on the basis of source
information. Even for that reason, the action of CBI cannot be countenanced − not being in
conformity with the CBI Manual. It is urged that the FIR does not disclose any offence qua the
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
6

appellant and that it was registered without offering any explanation for the inordinate delay.
Finally, it is urged that the registration of FIR itself was barred by Section 6 of the 1946 Act read
with notification dated 19.2.1996.
9. The State of Bihar has supported the claim of the appellant on the question of law by contending
that Policing is a State subject under Entry 2 List II of Schedule VII of the Constitution. Hence,
having due regard to the federal structure recognised under the Constitution, provision such as
Section 6 of the 1946 Act has been incorporated. According to the State, combined reading of
Sections 2, 3, 5 and 6 of the 1946 Act would show that DSPE has jurisdiction to investigate offences
notified under Section 3 in any Union Territory; the use of the expression “may” in Sections 3 and 5
is indicative that it is only an enabling provision, enabling the Central Government to extend the
area of operation of DSPE to any area in the State by an order. The order under Section 5, however,
is made subject to the condition predicated in Section 6, namely, it would come into effect only after
consent of the concerned State Government is accorded. For, Section 6 uses the expression “shall”,
which is suggestive of the fact that the said requirement is mandatory in nature and without such
prior consent of the State, DSPE would not get jurisdiction to enter upon investigation of the
specified offences and exercise its powers and jurisdiction in any area of a State. As regards the
notification dated 19.2.1996, it is urged by the State that it is a general consent, making it amply
clear that prior consent to investigate cases against the public servants employed in connection with
the affairs of the Government of Bihar is essential. That requirement has not been dispensed with in
terms of the proviso in the subject notification. It is always open to the State to accord partial
consent on the terms specified in the notification. As the State is variously concerned about the
actions of its employees including the subject of Policing being a State subject, it is urged that the
DSPE ought to have intimated the State about the acts of commission and omission of the officers of
the State, so that the State could have examined the same and resorted to appropriate action as per
law. The State is also relying on the exposition in Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights,
West Bengal (supra). It is urged by the State that no consent has been obtained by the DSPE in
terms of the proviso, although the allegations in the FIR registered by them against the appellant
who is a State Government employee are in connection with the affairs of the State.
10. The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the CBI has adopted the reasons noted by
the High Court. He has urged that the occupation/residence of one of the accused cannot come in
the way of DSPE to carry on the investigation in respect of offence of conspiracy to defraud the
Government of India undertaking whose registered office is at Delhi and moreso because the
siphoning of funds of the undertaking has been committed within the territory of Delhi. The
investigation of such a case cannot be regarded as in respect of an offence independently committed
by the public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar as such. As
a result, no consent of any State to investigate such an office would be necessary. As a matter of fact,
no State would have jurisdiction to enquire into or investigate the offence committed in relation to
the Government of India undertaking registered in the territory of Delhi. Similarly, only the Courts
in Delhi would have jurisdiction to take cognizance of the stated offence. In such a situation, the
occupation or status of the accused or his residence cannot be the basis to constrict the powers of
the investigating agency (DSPE) in any manner. It is urged that if the argument of the appellant is
accepted, that would have serious implications. For, in cases where the DSPE during the course of
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
7

investigation of specified crimes committed in Union Territory is confronted with the accused
employed/residing in different States, it would require the DSPE to obtain consent of every such
State wherever the accused resides and is an employee of that State. That cannot be the intention of
law in empowering the special police establishment (DSPE) to investigate specified and notified
offences committed within the Union Territory. The harmonious and purposive construction of the
provisions of the 1946 Act, in particular Section 5 thereof, would be to confine the consent of the
State Government under Section 6 in respect of investigation of crime exclusively committed within
the jurisdiction of that State. In other words, no consent would be required in respect of specified
offence(s) committed within the Union Territory, which could be investigated only by the DSPE
under Sections 2 and 3 of the 1946 Act throughout India. Any other interpretation would render the
dispensation regarding investigation of specified offences committed within the Union Territory
otiose. This is moreso because the State would have no jurisdiction to investigate such offence
committed within the jurisdiction of the Union Territory. Resultantly, the question of obtaining
consent of the State merely because one of the accused involved in the offence happens to be
residing in that State or is a public servant of that State, is not contemplated by law. It is also urged
that the proviso to the subject notification dated 19.2.1996 has the effect of defeating the purpose for
which special legislation has been enacted and dispensation thereunder for investigation of specified
offences is established.
11. Relying on the exposition of the Constitution Bench in Subramanian Swamy vs. Director, Central
Bureau of Investigation & Anr.4, it is urged that the principle underlying the declaration of
provisions such as Section 6A of the 1946 Act being ultra vires, must apply to the proviso which is
part of notification being an executive instruction classifying offenders differently for treatment
thereunder, including investigation of offences and prosecution for offences, according to their
status in life on account of being employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of
Bihar. That is impermissible and cannot be 4 (2014) 8 SCC 682 countenanced as it defeats the
purpose of finding prima facie truth into the allegations of the specified crime, as every person
accused of committing the same offence is to be dealt with in the same manner in accordance with
law, which is equal in its application to everyone. The alleged acts of commission and omission of
the appellant in the State of Bihar would not alter the substratum of the offence or crime in question
stated to have been committed to defraud the Government undertaking (BRBCL) and resultantly
siphoning of its funds within the Union Territory of Delhi (National Capital Territory of Delhi).
12. Our attention is also invited by the learned Additional Solicitor General to a recent decision of
the Delhi High Court in Anand Agarwal vs. Union of India & Ors.5, which has upheld the stand
taken by the CBI that requirement of consent of the State is premised on the basis that the specified
offence or offences committed and under investigation, have taken place in the State (outside the
Union Territory). The Delhi High Court has agreed with the view taken by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna in the impugned judgment. It is urged that the appeal be dismissed being devoid
of merit.
5 (2018) SCC Online Del 11713
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
8

13. After cogitating over the rival submissions, the core issue which arises for consideration in the
present case is: whether the proviso in the stated notification dated 19.2.1996 would come in the
way of the officials of DSPE to register FIR and carry on investigation of specified offences
committed within the Union Territory (National Capital Territory of Delhi), to which the 1946 Act
applies?
14. The 1946 Act has been enacted to make provision for constitution of a special police force in
Delhi for the investigation of certain offences (committed) in the Union Territories, for the
superintendence and administration of the said force and for the extension to other areas of the
powers and jurisdiction of the members in regard to the investigation of the said offences. This Act
applies to the whole of India. Section 2 of the 1946 Act enables the Central Government to constitute
a special force to be called DSPE for the investigation in any Union Territory of specified offences
notified under Section 3. Section 3 of the 1946 Act enables the Central Government, by notification
in the official gazette to specify the offences or classes of offences which are to be investigated by the
DSPE. It is not in dispute that the offences referred to in the subject FIR are so specified by the
notification issued under Section 3.
15. The consequence of establishing a special police force under Section 2 is to empower the
members of the said police force to exercise all the powers, duties, privileges and liabilities
throughout the Union Territory in relation to the investigation of specified offences, which police
officers of that Union Territory have in connection with the investigation of offences committed
therein. By virtue of sub−Section (3) of Section 2 of the 1946 Act, any member of the said
establishment of or above the rank of Sub−Inspector may, subject to any orders which the Central
Government may make in this behalf, exercise in any Union Territory any of the powers of the
officer in charge of a police station in the area in which he is for the time being and when so
exercising such powers shall, subject to any such orders, be deemed to be an officer in charge of a
police station discharging the functions of such an officer within the limits of his station.
Resultantly, specified offences committed within the Union Territories are required to be
investigated exclusively by the special police force constituted for that purpose.
16. The purport of Section 5 of the 1946 Act is to enable the Central Government to extend the
powers and jurisdiction of members of the DSPE for the investigation of any offence or class of
offences specified in the notification under Section 3, in a State not being a Union Territory. Such
extension of powers and jurisdiction of members of the special police force becomes necessary in
respect of specified offences “committed outside the jurisdiction of the Union Territory” referred to
in Sections 2 and 3 of the 1946 Act. However, in keeping with the federal structure of the
Constitution which is fundamental to the Constitution, consent of such a State has been made
essential, as predicated in Section 6 of the 1946 Act. Sections 5 and 6 of the 1946 Act read thus: − “5.
Extension of powers and jurisdiction of special police establishment to other areas.—(1) The Central
Government may by order extend to any area (including Railway areas), in a State, not being a
Union territory the powers and jurisdiction of members of the Delhi Special Police Establishment
for the investigation of any offences or classes of offences specified in a notification under section 3.
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
9

(2) When by an order under sub−section (1) the powers and jurisdiction of members of the said
police establishment are extended to any such area, a member thereof may, subject of any orders
which the Central Government may make in this behalf, discharge the functions of a police officer in
that area and shall, while so discharging such functions, be deemed to be a member of a police force
of that area and be vested with the powers, functions and privileges and be subject to the liabilities
of a police officer belonging to that police force. (3) Where any such order under sub−section (1) is
made in relation to any area, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub−section (2), any
member of the Delhi Special Police Establishment of or above the rank of Sub− Inspector may,
subject to any orders which the Central Government may make in this behalf, exercise the powers of
the officer in charge of a police station in that area and when so exercising such powers, shall be
deemed to be an officer incharge of a police station discharging the functions of such an officer
within the limits of his station.
6. Consent of State Government to exercise of powers and jurisdiction.—Nothing contained in
section 5 shall be deemed to enable any member of the Delhi Special Police Establishment to
exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area in a State, not being a Union territory or railway area,
without the consent of the Government of that State.” Such a consent may not be necessary
regarding the investigation by the special police force (DSPE) in respect of specified offences
committed within Union Territory and other offences associated therewith. That may be so, even if
one of the accused involved in the given case may be residing or employed in some other State
(outside the Union Territory) including in connection with the affairs of the State/local
body/corporation, company or bank of the State or controlled by the State/institution receiving or
having received financial aid from State Government, as the case may be. Taking any other view
would require the special police force to comply with the formality of taking consent for
investigation even in relation to specified offence committed within Union Territory, from the
concerned State merely because of the fortuitous situation that part of the associated offence is
committed in other State and the accused involved in the offence is residing in or employed in
connection with the affairs of that State. Such interpretation would result in an absurd situation
especially when the 1946 Act extends to the whole of India and the special police force has been
constituted with a special purpose for investigation of specified offences committed within the
Union Territory, in terms of notification issued under Section 3 of the 1946 Act.
17. This Court in M. Balakrishna Reddy (supra) expounded the purport of Sections 3, 5 and 6 of the
1946 Act and observed in paragraph 19 as under: − “19. Plain reading of the above provisions goes to
show that for exercise of jurisdiction by CBI in a State (other than Union Territory or Railway area),
consent of the State Government is necessary. In other words, before the provisions of the Delhi Act
are invoked to exercise power and jurisdiction by Special Police Establishment in any State, the
following conditions must be fulfilled:
(i) A notification must be issued by the Central Government specifying the offences to
be investigated by Delhi Special Police Establishment (Section 3);
(ii) An order must be passed by the Central Government extending the powers and
jurisdiction of Delhi Special Police Establishment to any State in respect of the
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
10

offences specified under Section 3 (Section 5); and
(iii) Consent of the State Government must be obtained for the exercise of powers by
Delhi Special Police Establishment in the State (Section 6).” This judgment dealt with
a case where offence was committed in the State of Madhya Pradesh in the year 1996,
which had already accorded consent under Section 6, but the accused at the time
when the case was registered, was working in a different State i.e. the State of Uttar
Pradesh. The challenge in that case was to the order which according to the appellant
therein, did not fulfil the elements of Section 6 of the 1946 Act. That challenge came
to be negatived by this Court in paragraphs 69 and 71 of the reported judgment, in
the following words: − “69. In the present case, the decision produced by the
respondent along with the counter−affidavit filed by the Superintendent of Police,
CBI, Bhopal clearly sets out all the particulars required by Section 6 of the Delhi Act.
It refers to the file/reference number, name of the department, the authority from
whom it was issued and communicated to the department concerned of the Central
Government. It, therefore, cannot be said that the State Government had not granted
consent under Section 6 of the Delhi Act.
xxx xxx xxx
71. A closer scrutiny of the relevant provisions of the Delhi Act also add credence to
the view which we are inclined to take. Section 3 refers to “notification” and requires
the Central Government to issue notification specifying offences or class of offences
to be investigated by Special Police Establishment. Section 5 uses the term “order”
and enables the Central Government to extend powers and jurisdiction of Special
Police Establishment to other areas not covered by the Act. Section 6 which speaks of
consent of the State Government for the exercise of powers and jurisdiction of the
Special Establishment neither refers to “notification” nor “order”.
It merely requires consent of the State Government for the application of the Delhi Act. Parliament,
in our considered opinion, advisedly and deliberately did not specify the mode, method or manner
for granting consent though in two preceding sections such mode was provided. If it intended that
such consent should be in a particular form, it would certainly have provided the form as it was
aware of different forms of exercise of power. It, therefore, depends on the facts of each case
whether the consent required by Section 6 of the Delhi Act has or has not been given by the State
Government and no rule of universal application can be laid down.”
18. The High Court, in the present case, after analysing the material on record clearly found that
BRBCL was a Government undertaking and the project undertaken by it was funded by the Central
Government and that it had its registered office in the Union Territory of Delhi (National Capital
Territory of Delhi), where the offence of defrauding the undertaking (BRBCL) and siphoning of its
funds was allegedly committed. We see no reason to deviate from the opinion so recorded by the
High Court.
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
11

19. The appellant, however, would rely on the allegations in the subject FIR to contend that the role
of the appellant at best is in respect of certain official duty in connection with the affairs of the
Government of Bihar. This submission overlooks the substratum of the allegations in the FIR, as
registered by the CBI against the CEO of BRBCL – Shri C. Sivakumar and the appellant being co−
accused (party to the conspiracy) regarding defrauding the Government of India undertaking
(BRBCL) having its registered office at Delhi (Union Territory) and siphoning of its funds. The
alleged role played by the appellant may be a means to facilitate the commission of crime of
defrauding and siphoning of funds. The FIR in that sense is not limited to an offence of
manipulation of official records of the State of Bihar as such, but is about the means used by the
different actors who were party to the conspiracy in defrauding the Government of India
undertaking (BRBCL) and siphoning of its funds.
20. Indisputably, the registered office of BRBCL is within the jurisdiction of Union Territory of Delhi
(National Capital Territory of Delhi) and allegedly the offence has been committed at Delhi, for
which reason the Delhi Court will have jurisdiction to take cognizance thereof. To put it differently,
the offence in question has been committed outside the State of Bihar. The investigation of the
stated offence may incidentally transcend to the territory of State of Bihar because of the acts of
commission and omission of the appellant who is resident of that State and employed in connection
with the affairs of the State of Bihar. That, however, cannot come in the way of special police force
(DSPE) from investigating the offence committed at Delhi and has been so registered by it and is
being investigated. Had it been an offence limited to manipulation of official record of the State and
involvement of officials of the State of Bihar, it would have been a different matter. It is not the case
of the appellant or the State of Bihar that even an offence accomplished at Delhi of defrauding of the
Government of India undertaking (having registered office at Delhi) and siphoning of the funds
thereof at Delhi can be investigated by the State of Bihar. If the State police has had no jurisdiction
to investigate the offence in question, as registered, then, seeking consent of the State in respect of
such offence does not arise. Any other approach would render the special provisions of the 1946 Act
otiose.
21. In any case, the respondent−State having granted general consent in terms of Section 6 of the
1946 Act vide notification dated 19.2.1996, it is not open to it to argue to the contrary. The
respondent−State cannot be allowed to approbate and reprobate.
22. Indeed, the said notification contains a proviso, which predicates that if any public servant
employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar is concerned in offences being
investigated by the special police force pursuant to the notification, prior consent of the State
Government qua him shall be obtained. This proviso must operate limited to cases or offences which
have been committed within the territory of the State of Bihar. If the specified offence is committed
outside the State of Bihar, as in this case in Delhi, the State police will have no jurisdiction to
investigate such offence and for which reason seeking consent of the State to investigate the same
would not arise. In our opinion, the stated proviso will have no application to the offence in question
and thus the Delhi special police force/DSPE (CBI) must be held to be competent to register the FIR
at Delhi and also to investigate the same without the consent of the State.
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
12

23. Even otherwise, the proviso has the effect of differentiating and classifying offenders differently
for treatment thereunder, including investigation of offences and prosecution for offences on the
basis of being public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar.
The power bestowed on special police force in terms of Sections 2 and 3 of the 1946 Act cannot be
undermined by an executive instruction in the form of proviso. Dealing with a similar challenge to a
statutory provision − Section 6A of the Act, the Constitution Bench of this Court in Subramanian
Swamy (supra) held that sub−Section (1) thereof was invalid and violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution. In paragraphs 61 and 68 of the said decision, the Court noted thus:− “61. The essence
of police investigation is skillful inquiry and collection of material and evidence in a manner by
which the potential culpable individuals are not forewarned. The previous approval from the
Government necessarily required under Section 6−A would result in indirectly putting to notice the
officers to be investigated before the commencement of investigation. Moreover, if CBI is not even
allowed to verify complaints by preliminary enquiry, how can the case move forward? A preliminary
enquiry is intended to ascertain whether a prima facie case for investigation is made out or not. If
CBI is prevented from holding a preliminary enquiry, at the very threshold, a fetter is put to enable
CBI to gather relevant material. As a matter of fact, CBI is not able to collect the material even to
move the Government for the purpose of obtaining previous approval from the Central Government.
xxx xxx xxx
68. Can it be said that the classification is based on intelligible differentia when one set of
bureaucrats of Joint Secretary level and above who are working with the Central Government are
offered protection under Section 6−A while the same level of officers who are working in the States
do not get protection though both classes of these officers are accused of an offence under the PC
Act, 1988 and inquiry/investigation into such allegations is to be carried out. Our answer is in the
negative. The provision in Section 6−A, thus, impedes tracking down the corrupt senior bureaucrats
as without previous approval of the Central Government, CBI cannot even hold preliminary inquiry
much less an investigation into the allegations. The protection in Section 6−A has propensity of
shielding the corrupt. The object of Section 6−A, that senior public servants of the level of Joint
Secretary and above who take policy decision must not be put to any harassment, sidetracks the
fundamental objective of the PC Act, 1988 to deal with corruption and act against senior public
servants. CBI is not able to proceed even to collect the material to unearth prima facie substance
into the merits of allegations. Thus, the object of Section 6−A itself is discriminatory. That being the
position, the discrimination cannot be justified on the ground that there is a reasonable
classification because it has rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.” (emphasis
supplied) The thrust of this exposition is that every person committing the same offence is to be
dealt with in the same manner in accordance with law, which is equal in its application to everyone.
The discrimination or differentiation must be founded on pertinent and real differences as
distinguished from irrelevant and artificial ones. In paragraph 70, the Court went on to observe that
every public servant against whom there is a reasonable suspicion of commission of a crime or there
are allegations of an offence under the PC Act has to be treated equally and similarly under law.
24. Suffice it to observe that the proviso contained in the stated notification dated 19.2.1996 cannot
be the basis to disempower the special police force/DSPE (CBI) from registering the offence
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
13

committed at Delhi to defraud the Government of India undertaking (BRBCL) and siphoning of its
funds and having its registered office at Delhi. Allegedly, the stated offence has been committed at
Delhi. If so, the Delhi Courts will have jurisdiction to take cognizance thereof. The State police (State
of Bihar) cannot investigate the specified offences committed and accomplished at Delhi, being
outside the territory of the State of Bihar. It must follow that the consent of the State of Bihar to
investigate such offence is not required in law and for which reason, the special police force would
be competent to carry on the investigation thereof even if one of the accused allegedly involved in
the commission of stated offence happens to be resident of the State of Bihar or employed in
connection with the affairs of the Government of Bihar and allegedly committed associated offences
in that capacity. In other words, consent of the State under Section 6 cannot come in the way or
constrict the jurisdiction of the special police force constituted under Section 2 to investigate
specified offences under Section 3 of the 1946 Act committed within the Union Territories. Indeed,
when the Court of competent jurisdiction proceeds to take cognizance of offence and particularly
against the appellant, it may consider the question of necessity of a prior sanction of the State of
Bihar qua its official(s) as may be required by law. That question can be considered on its own
merits in accordance with law.
25. For the view that we have taken, it may not be necessary for us to analyse the decisions relied
upon by the parties, which in our opinion, do not pertain to the question under consideration
regarding the effect of the proviso contained in the notification dated 19.2.1996.
26. In view of the above, this appeal must fail and the same is accordingly dismissed. Pending
interlocutory applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.
..................................J. (A.M. Khanwilkar) ..................................J. (Dinesh Maheshwari) New Delhi;
April 24, 2020.
Kanwal Tanuj vs The State Of Bihar on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39639613/
14
