Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2614, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
544
Author: Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench: Dinesh Maheshwari, A.M.Khanwilkar
                                                                                        
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3688 OF 2017
                 KAVITA KANWAR.                                                         
                                                                 Vs.
                 MRS. PAMELA MEHTA & ORS.                                               
                                                            JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari, J.
INTRODUCTION WITH BRIEF OUTLINE
1. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 27.06.2014 in FAO
No. 36 of 2010, whereby the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi has dismissed the appeal preferred by
the present appellant and has affirmed the judgment and order dated 23.11.2009 as passed by the
Additional District Judge, West District, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi in Probate Case No. 465 of 2006,
resulting in rejection of the appellant’s prayer for grant of probate in relation to the Will dated
20.05.2003, said to have been executed by the mother of the contesting parties1.
1 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the contested Will’ or ‘the Will in question’ or the ‘document in
question’.
2. The prayer of the appellant for grant of probate in relation to the Will in question has been
declined concurrently by the Trial Court and by the High Court essentially after finding several
unexplained suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will in question. Being aggrieved, the
petitioner-appellant, who was appointed as the executor of the Will in question and who was,
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
1

admittedly, the major beneficiary thereunder, has preferred this appeal while maintaining that
execution of Will by the testatrix with due compliance of all the requirements of law has been clearly
established on record and there has not been any such suspicious circumstance which might operate
against the genuineness of the Will in question.
3. Therefore, essentially the point for determination in this appeal is as to whether the Trial Court
and the High Court were justified in declining to grant probate in relation to the Will dated
20.05.2003 as prayed for. THE PARTIES AND THE WITNESSES
4. For comprehension of the subject-matter and for effective determination of the questions raised
in this appeal, we may take note of the principal parties and the witnesses involved in the matter
with their respective roles as infra:
4.1. The testatrix:
Smt. Amarjeet Mamik wife of Lt. Col. (Rtd.) D. S. Mamik.
Her husband Lt. Col. (Rtd.) D. S. Mamik had expired on 20.10.2002.
The testatrix herself expired on 21.05.2006, leaving behind two daughters and one
son, who are the contesting parties herein.
4.2. The appellant: Smt. Kavita Kanwar She is the younger daughter of the testatrix.
She is shown as the executor of the Will in question and she is the major beneficiary
thereunder, though with certain conditions. She had filed the petition seeking
probate that has been declined by the Trial Court and the High Court.
4.3. Respondent No. 1: Smt. Pamela Mehta2 She is the elder and widowed daughter
of the testatrix. The conditions stated in the contested Will are purportedly aimed at
making a provision for her residence. Initially, she did not file the written statement
of contest but at the later stage of proceedings and during the evidence of the
appellant, she attempted to file her written statement. However, the prayer so made
by her was declined by the Trial Court. Nevertheless, she has continuously contested
the matter, as shall be noticed hereafter.
2 The respondent No. 1 of the present appeal was on record as respondent No. 2 in
the Trial Court and High Court. Therefore, reference to her in the impugned
judgments and other proceedings shall appear with description as ‘respondent No. 2’.
However, for continuity of expressions in this judgment, she is referred to as ‘the
respondent No. 1’ with contextual clarification wherever required.
4.4. Respondent No. 2: Col. (Rtd.) Prithiviraj Mamik3 He is the son of the testatrix.
By way of bequeath in the Will in question, he has been given ‘credit balance’ lying in
the bank accounts of the testatrix but with clarification that he shall not inherit any
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
2

portion of the immovable assets of testatrix. He had filed the written statement and
has consistently contested the claim for probate of the Will in question.
4.5. The attesting witnesses:
PW-2: Shri. Urvinder Singh Kohli, who is said to be a friend of the appellant and his
daughter got married to the son of a cousin of the appellant; and PW-3: Major
General Manjit Ahluwalia, who is son of the sister of testatrix.
THE   IMMOVABLE                 PROPERTY             INVOLVED:            ANNALS        
DESCRIPTION
5. We may also notice at the outset that the immovable property, a part whereof
forms the subject of bequeath and which is the major bone of contention in this case,
has its own chronicle of different transfers as per the desire of its original owner,
father of the contesting parties. For comprehension of the relevant factual aspects as
also salient features of this case, it is equally necessary to take note of the description
of immovable property in question as also the past dealings in relation thereto.
3 Similar to FN 2 ibid., the respondent No. 2 of the present appeal was on record as
respondent No. 3 in the Trial Court and High Court. Therefore, in the impugned
judgments and other proceedings he is described as ‘respondent No. 3’. However, for
continuity of expressions in this judgment, he is referred to as ‘the respondent No. 2’
with contextual clarification wherever required.
5.1. The property in question is identified as bearing number D-179, Defence Colony, New Delhi
admeasuring 325 square yards and comprising of a building having ground floor, first floor, terrace
and annexe block of garage and servant quarter. The whole property originally belonged to Lt. Col.
(Rtd.) D. S. Mamik, father of the contesting parties who, in his lifetime, gifted the ground floor of
this property to the appellant by way of a registered Gift Deed dated 25.01.2001; and thereafter, he
bequeathed the remaining portion/s, that is, the first floor, terrace and the annexe block of garage
and servant quarter in favour of his wife Smt. Amarjeet Mamik through a registered Will dated
14.02.2001. Lt. Col. (Rtd.) D. S. Mamik expired on 20.10.2002. Hence, after his demise, Smt.
Amarjeet Mamik, mother of the contesting parties, became owner of the first floor and other
portions of the said property except the ground floor. 5.2. It is also noteworthy that at the time of
execution of the contested Will dated 20.05.2003, the testatrix Smt. Amarjeet Mamik was residing
at the ground floor of this property (which had otherwise been gifted to the appellant by her father).
The first floor of this property (which had otherwise been bequeathed to the testatrix by her
husband) has remained in occupation of respondent No. 1, the widowed daughter of the testatrix.
THE WILL IN QUESTION
6. The contested Will dated 20.05.2003 has been placed on record as Ex. PW1/H. A vast variety of
features related with this Will form the subject of dispute in this case. The Trial Court and the High
Court have also analysed and taken into account several of the suspicious circumstances
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
3

surrounding this Will and the long length of arguments of the learned counsel for the contesting
parties in this appeal have also revolved around this Will. Having regard to the questions involved, it
would be apposite to take note of the features and attributes of the contested Will to appreciate the
stand of the contesting parties as also the findings in the impugned judgments.
6.1. The contested Will is drawn up in two pages. It is a partly holograph document in the manner
that its opening and concluding passages/clauses are handwritten whereas the other
paragraphs/clauses are of electronic print. This Will is said to have been executed on 20.05.2003 by
Smt. Amarjeet Mamik while residing on the ground floor of the property in question at D-179,
Defence Colony, New Delhi in the presence of the attesting witnesses and the appellant.
7. The Will in question reads as under: -
“WILL I Amarjit Mamik aged 77 years w/o Lt. Col. (Retd) D.S. MAMIK r/o Ground
floor D. 179, Defence Colony New Dlhi – 110024 c/o hereby make This my will and
testament on This 20 day of May 2003 at New Delhi.
1. WHEREAS I was married to Lt. Col. (Rtd.) D.S. Mamik from which union the
following children were born:
1. Mrs. Pamela Mehta - Daughter, aged 60 years
2. Col. (Rtd.) Prithivijit Mamik - Son, aged 57 years
3. Mrs. Kavita Kanwar - Daughter, aged 50 years
2. AND WHEREAS my said husband was the owner of the said building bearing No.
D-179, Defence Colony, New Delhi – 110024, constructed on a plot of land
admeasuring 325 sq. yds. and comprising of a ground floor, first floor, terrace
thereon and the annexe block of garage and servant quarters thereon.
3. AND WHEREAS during his life time my said husband had executed a duly
registered Gift Deed dated 25.1.2001 in respect of the ground floor of the said
building in favour of my aforementioned youngest daughter Mrs. Kavita Kanwar who
has after the execution of the said Gift Deed granted a licence to use the same floor
for my residential purposes out of natural love and affection.
4. AND WHEREAS my said husband has vide Will dated 14.2.2001, validly executed
and duly registered, bequeathed to me the first floor, the terrace thereon and all other
portions of the said building, hereinafter referred to as the property, save and except
the said ground floor of the same building.
I am in my full senses and disposing mind and I fully understand what is right and wrong. I am on
my own accord voluntary, without any force, pressure, coercion or influence of any kind am making
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
4

this Will in order to direct as to the manner of the inheritance of my aforementioned assets upon my
demise. I hereby and hereunder revoke any wills or codicils that I may have made in the past.
1. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to my youngest daughter the said Mrs. Kavita Kanwar my
entire share in the aforementioned immovable property, namely the first floor and the terrace
including all other portions, save and except the ground floor with specific directions that my said
daughter Mrs. Kavita Kanwar will carry out either of the 2 options as deemed proper by her, namely
(a) construct on the terrace of the said building such residential facility of such covered area as is
permissible under the Municipal Building Bye-laws at the time of my demise and hand over
possession of the same construction to my elder daughter, namely Mrs. Pamela Mehta, who shall
thereafter acquire sole exclusive title to the said portion with the terrace rights thereon continuing
to vest in favour of the said Mrs. Kavita Kanwar, OR
(b) demolish the said building and carry out such new construction as is permissible under the
Municipal Building Bye-laws and be the sole exclusive owner of the entire building thus constructed,
save and except such constructed residential portion on the highest floor of such building, which
portion shall vest solely and exclusively in favour of my said elder daughter Mrs. Pamela Mehta,
while the terrace rights thereon shall continue to vest in favour of my said daughter Mrs. Kavita
Kanwar.
2. I also direct that in the event of my acquiring any further movable or immovable assets
hereinafter or any other assets that I may have forgotten to mention in the present Will the same
shall devolve upon my daughter Mrs. Kavita Kanwar.
3. I hereby give, devise and bequeath to my son, Col.
Prithivijit Mamik, the credit balance lying in my Bank Accounts. I however, clarify that my said son
shall not inherit any portion of my aforementioned immovable assets.
4. I hereby appoint my said daughter Mrs. Kavita Kanwar as the Executor of my Will.
In witness whereof, I Amarjit Mamik have set and subscribed my hand to this my last will as also to
each of the 2 pages that comprise it having understood the contents thereof and endorsing thereby
and giving my approval to the bequest made therein.
I fully endorse the manner in which my assets shall devolve as stated hereinabove in my will made
out in 2 pages. Each of which page has been signed by me.
                                                Amarjeet Mamik
                                                 Testator
Signed by the Testator in the presence of
the witnesses and the witnesses have             (Sd/-)
signed in the presence of the Testator
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
5

Witness No. 1: (Sd/-)
                 Maj Gen Manjit Ahluwalia
                 D-34 Defence Colony
                 20 May 2003
Witness No. 2: (Sd/-)
               (Sd/-) 20/5/03 Urvinder S. Kohli
                                                 S/o S. Navinder S. Kohli
                                                 227 Jor Bagh N. Delhi”
(Note: The bold italicised portions are in the handwriting of the testatrix whereas unbold italicised
portions are in the handwriting of the respective witnesses. All other contents are of electronic print)
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS, ISSUES AND EVIDENCE AS ALSO THE RELEVANT PART OF
PROCEEDINGS IN THE TRIAL COURT
8. Having taken note of the particulars of the parties and the property involved as also the contents
of the Will in question, we may now summarise the pleadings of the parties, the issues framed by the
Trial Court, the material aspects of evidence led by the parties and the relevant part of the
proceedings in the Trial Court, which have bearing on the questions involved herein.
8.1. Briefly put, the petition leading to this appeal was filed by the appellant on 06.11.2006 in the
Court of District Judge at Delhi under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 4 for grant of
probate of the Will in question, said to have been executed by her mother Smt. Amarjeet Mamik
while arraying the State (N.C.T., Delhi) as the party respondent. Thereafter, by filing amended
memo of parties, the present respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were arrayed as respondent Nos. 2 and 3
respectively. The appellant stated the facts relating to the children of the testatrix as also the said
gift of the ground floor made by the father in her favour and then, asserted in the petition that by the
Will in question, the testatrix had bequeathed the first floor and other portions except the ground
floor of the 4 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Succession Act’. said property at No. D-179, Defence
Colony, New Delhi in her favour with directions to carry out one of the two options, i.e., either to
construct on the terrace of the first floor of the said property or to demolish the said building and to
re-construct and give the highest floor of the said building to Mrs. Pamela Mehta (other daughter of
testatrix) while retaining the terrace rights thereon; and had bequeathed the balance in her savings
bank account maintained with Central Bank of India in favour of her son Col. (Rtd.) Prithivijit
Mamik. While stating that the Will in question was duly executed in the presence of the aforesaid
two witnesses and that the testatrix expired on 21.05.2006, the appellant asserted that she was the
executor and beneficiary of the Will in question and was entitled to seek its probate. 8.2. For their
relevance, we may usefully take note of the material contents of the said petition as also those of
Schedule A and Schedule B attached to the petition, giving out respectively the particulars of the
natural heirs of the deceased Smt. Amarjeet Mamik and a list of assets of the deceased as under:-
“ *** *** ***
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
6

4. That the “WILL” dated 20.05.2003 was duly executed by Smt. Amarjeet Mamik in the presence of
two witnesses namely Major Gen. Manjit Ahluwalia r/o D- 34, Defence Colony, New Delhi and Sh.
Urvinder S.Kohli s/o S.Narinder S.Kohli r/o 227 Jor Bagh, New Delhi-110003.
5. That the deceased was the owner of first floor, the terrace thereon and all other portions of
premises no. D-179, Defence Colony, New Delhi-110024, save and except the ground floor of the said
building, as mentioned in the will and the said property, is likely to come to the hands of the
petitioner and her sister namely Mrs. Pamela Mehta as per the “WILL”.
6. That the husband of the deceased was the owner of property bearing no. D-179, Defence Colony,
New Delhi-110024 constructed on a plot of land measuring 325 square yards and comprising of a
ground floor, first floor, terrace thereon and an annexe block of garage and servant quarters
thereon.
7. That during his lifetime the husband of the deceased had executed a duly registered gift deed
dated 25.01.2001 in respect of the ground floor of the said building in favour of his youngest
daughter i.e. Smt. Kavita Kanwar.
8. That the husband of the deceased vide ‘Registered Will’ dated 14.02.2001 bequeathed to the
deceased the first floor, the terrace thereon and all other portions of the said building to the
deceased, save and except the ground floor.
9. That Smt. Amarjeet Mamik died on 21.05.2006 at Delhi within the jurisdiction of this Court.
10. That the deceased Smt. Amarjeet Mamik was a Hindu by religion and she left behind, besides the
petitioner the following relatives/legal heirs :
      (i) Mrs. Pamela Mehta                      Daughter
      (ii) Col. (Rtd.) Prithvijit Mamik          Son
The complete addresses of the above heirs are given in the annexures marked as schedule ‘A’
attached with this petition. Except the above legal representatives there is no legal heir of the first
class as mentioned in the Hindu Succession Act.
11. That the petitioner is one of the beneficiaries of the “WILL” dated 20.05.2003 and the petitioner
is also the executor of the said “WILL”. The immoveable property which is likely to come to the
hands of the petitioner is having the worth of about Rs. 18 Lakhs.
12. That the assets which are likely to come in the hands of the petitioner are the first floor and other
portions of the property no. D-179, Defence Colony, New Delhi-
110024 save and except the ground floor of the building and to carry out the two options of
constructing either on the terrace of the first floor of the said building or to demolish the said
building and to re-construct and give highest floor of the said building to Mrs. Pamela Mehta and
retaining the terrace rights there on.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
7

13. That the balance in the Savings Bank account No. 1001020597 maintained with the Central Bank
of India, Defence Colony, New Delhi as mentioned in the Schedule-B attached to the petition will go
to Col.
(Rtd.) Prithivijit Mamik and the petitioner does not claim the same.
                 ***                ***              ***
                                 SCHEDULE A
Name and Addresses of the L.Rs of the deceased Smt. Amarjeet Mamik S. No. Name Relationship
Address
1. Mrs. Pamela Mehta Daughter D-179,Defence Colony, New Delhi-
110024.
2. Co. (Rtd.) Prithvijit Mamik Son Madhuban Gian Vatika, Khalini, Shimla(H.P.)
3. Mrs. Kavita Kanwar Daughter S-45, Panchshila Park, New Delhi-3 *** *** *** SCHEDULE B
IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY:
First floor, the terrace thereon and all other portions of premises no. D-179, Defence
Colony, New Delhi-110024, save and except the ground floor of the said building.
MOVEABLE ASSETS:
1. Balance in Savings Account No. 1001020597 maintained with Central Bank of
India, Defence Colony, New Delhi. Rs. 577389.00” *** *** ***”
9. The said petition seeking probate was eventually transferred to the Court of
Additional District Judge, Delhi for consideration. After requisite publication and
due notice, the respondents put in appearance but, on 18.04.2007, it was given out
on behalf of the present respondent No. 1 that she did not wish to file objections to
the petition. However, the objections with documents were indeed filed on behalf of
the present respondent No. 2, who refuted the claim of the appellant and contended,
inter alia, that the Will in question was forged and fabricated, where the appellant
was the major beneficiary as also the executor; that there was no reason for exclusion
of the respondents and grandchildren from the legacy; and that the property in
question being an ancestral property, belongs to all the legal heirs of late Shri D.S.
Mamik. The replying respondent maintained that there existed no dispute between
testatrix and himself and there was no reason for the mother to have excluded him
from the Will. He also contended that the property bequeathed in favour of the
appellant was worth crores of rupees and hence, it was impossible to comprehend
that his mother had left him merely a sum of Rs. 5,77,389/- when the relations
between him and his mother were cordial.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
8

10. The Trial Court framed the following issues for determination of the questions
involved in the matter: -
“1. Whether the Will dated 20-5-2003 of Smt. Amarjeet Mamik is proper and valid?
OPP
2. Whether the Will dated 20-5-2003 of Smt. Amarjeet Mamik is forged and
fabricated? OPR-3
3. Whether the petitioner is entitled to the grant of Probate/Letter of Administration
in respect of Will dated 20-5- 2003 of Smt. Amarjeet Mamik? OPP
4. Relief”
11. In evidence, the appellant examined herself as PW-1; and the two attesting
witnesses of the contested Will, Shri Urvinder Singh Kohli and Major General Manjit
Ahluwalia as PW-2 and PW-3 respectively. Shri Nikhil Kanwar, son of the appellant,
was also examined as PW-4. In documentary evidence, the Will in question was
marked as Ex. PW1/H. 11.1. It had been the consistent case of the appellant that she
had no prior knowledge that the Will was being executed on the given day and that it
was the testatrix who invited the appellant to her residence. The appellant asserted in
her evidence that only after reaching her mother’s house on the given day, it came to
her knowledge that her mother was executing a Will.
She further stated that she was not aware of the contents of the Will. It had also been the assertion
of the appellant that her parents had special love and affection for her and that had been the reason
for them having gifted and bequeathed the said property to her only. The appellant also stated in the
cross-examination: (i) that she did not know the educational qualification of the testatrix but she
(testatrix) knew how to read and write in English; (ii) that she and the testatrix were not residing
together for the last 20-22 years;
(iii) that the testatrix neither discussed the contents of the Will with her nor mentioned as to who
had drawn and typed the Will in question; (iv) that she came to know about the existence of the Will
on 20-21 May, 2003; (v) that her mother had not called respondent Nos. 1 and 2 on the day of
execution of the Will; (vi) that respondent No. 1 was living on the floor above the testatrix and was
looking after the testatrix, who was suffering from cancer;
(vii) that the testatrix had called the attesting witnesses; (viii) that she did not know when the
testatrix discussed the Will with the respondents; (ix) that the testatrix had discussed the contents of
the Will with the attesting witnesses (x) that she remembered the testatrix writing something but
was not sure whether it was on the Will or something else 5; and (xi) that the relations of the
testatrix and the respondent No. 2 were strained. 11.2. PW-2 and PW-3, the attesting witnesses, both
specifically deposed that on their arrival at the house of Smt. Amarjeet Mamik, they found that the
appellant was already present there; that the testatrix wrote something on the Will in their presence
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
9

before signing it; and that they were unaware of the contents of the Will as the same was not
discussed with them. PW-2 also maintained that on 18.05.2003, the appellant had called him to the
house of her mother on 20.05.2003. On the other hand, PW-3 deposed that it was the testatrix who
invited him to her house that day; that he was having good relations with the appellant and the
respondents; that the testatrix was having good relations with respondent No. 2 and also that when
Smt. Amarjeet Mamik wrote something on the Will, she copied it from a draft which she had with
her.
12. In opposition, the contesting respondents deposed as R2W-1 and R3W-1 respectively. Shri Ram
Gopal Meena from the Post Office, Defence Colony was examined as R3W-2; Shri S.P. Sharma from
State Bank of India as R3W-3; Shri R.S. Negi from Defence Colony Association Club as R3W-4; and
Shri S.P. Khamra from Central Bank of India was examined as R3W-5. Several documents produced
by the respondents like family photographs, birthday card sent by testatrix to respondent No. 2 etc.
shall also be referred to at the appropriate juncture, to the extent of relevancy. 5 Though in the
affidavit-in-evidence, the appellant had mentioned that her mother had written the introduction
portion as also the concluding portion on the Will. 12.1. The respondent No. 1 in her evidence, inter
alia, deposed that their mother was not even 10th standard pass and that she was having cordial
relations with herself as also with the respondent No. 2. 12.2. The respondent No. 2 in his evidence,
inter alia, deposed that he was having good relations with his mother; and, as he was serving in
Indian Army, the mother would talk to him over the phone and would even send letters and birthday
card wishing him all the happiness.
13. Before proceeding further, one of the peculiar aspects of the matter, which carry its own bearing
on the relevant questions and emanates from the record of proceedings of the Trial Court, may be
noticed as infra. 13.1. It appears that at the initial stage of proceedings in the Trial Court, the
relations of the appellant and the respondent No. 1 (who was respondent No. 2 in the Trial Court)
had not gone into any discord. As noticed, the present respondent No. 1 stated before the Trial Court
on 18.04.2007 that she did not wish to file any objections to the petition. However, it appears that
during the course of evidence of the appellant, differences and disputes spurted between the
appellant and the respondent No. 1 and the appellant filed a separate civil suit for injunction against
the respondent No. 1. In sequel to this new position of conflict of interests, the respondent No. 1
attempted to put forward direct contest of the petition seeking probate and, on 24.03.2008, moved
an application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure (‘CPC’) before the Trial Court,
seeking opportunity of further cross-examination of the appellant. In this application, the
respondent No. 1, inter alia, raised a plea about the alleged third page of the Will in question. The
application so moved was rejected by the Trial Court on 25.03.2008 and, as regards the point
concerning the alleged third page of the Will, the Court observed as under:
“25.03.2008 *** *** *** Point No. 2: From the point No. 2, it appears that
respondent No. 2 now is raising a totally different and new stand regarding the 3rd
page of the Will. She has not produced the original or copy of the alleged 3 rd page
along with this application. The story of this 3rd page has come on record first time
through this application which cannot be believed when nothing in this regard was
asked in the cross examination of PW-1. Non filing of any objections against this Will
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
10

despite taking opportunities prima facie leads to the inference that respondent No. 2
accepted the Will as correct. She was also given some portion in the property under
the Will and thus kept quite without disputing Will and now is challenging the
genuineness of the Will all of a sudden simply on the ground that petitioner has filed
a civil suit for injunction claiming exclusive ownership of the property. In the probate
proceedings, the question of the ownership or title is not decided and court is only
concerned with the fact whether the Will is genuine or not. Counsel for the petitioner
during arguments stated that the rights given to the respondent No. 2 under the Will
shall be protected. Keeping in view these above circumstances, I am of the view that
no permission can be granted to the respondent No. 2 to cross examine further at
point No. 2 mentioned in para No. 4 of the application.” 13.2. On 24.03.2008,
another part of the proceedings had been that the Court closed the opportunity for
cross-examination of some of the witnesses of the appellant by the respondent No. 2.
After the aforesaid proceedings, an application under Order IX Rule 7 CPC was filed
on behalf of the respondent No. 2. On the other hand, an application seeking
permission to file written statement and for condonation of delay was filed on behalf
of the respondent No. 1. In that application, the present respondent No. 1 again
referred to the alleged third page of the Will; and such an assertion was again
emphatically denied by the appellant while maintaining that the Will in question was
only in two pages and there was no third page of the Will as alleged.
13.2.1. The aforesaid two applications were dealt with by the Trial Court in its order
dated 03.07.2008. While the application filed by the respondent No. 2 was granted
on costs but the application moved by the respondent No. 1 was rejected with costs.
In regard to the aspects concerning the alleged third page of the Will, the Trial Court,
observed as under:
“In this application u/s 5 of Limitation Act, respondent no. 2 has relied upon alleged
3rd page of the Will whereas petitioner stated that the Will consisted of only 2 pages
and it has no 3rd page. Respondent No. 2 has placed on record photocopy of that
alleged 3rd page but even if this photocopy is seen and compared with original Will,
then prima facie it can be said that it was not a part of the original Will the alleged
3rd page appears to be some another document and prima facia it is not certainly 3
rd page of the Will. Otherwise alleged 3rd page of the Will can not be relied upon
because in the cross examination of PW-1 respondent no. 2 has not referred about it
any where or confronted her with it though admittedly it was in her possession since
beginning.” 13.3. The respondents yet persisted with their assertion about existence
of the third page of Will in question and now, the respondent No. 2 moved an
application under Order XI Rule 12 and 14 CPC seeking production of the same. This
application was also resisted by the appellant while denying existence of any such
third page and even with the allegation that this third page had been fabricated by the
respondents in connivance with each other. The Trial Court dealt with and rejected
the application so moved by the respondent No. 2 (who was respondent No. 3 in the
Trial Court) by way of its order dated 23.08.2008, inter alia, with the following
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
11

observations:-
“Counsel for Respondent no. 3 during arguments read the cross examination of the
petitioner as well as the contents of the alleged third page of the Will to show that,
that the movable properties was distributed by the deceased during her life time in
accordance with the contents of the third page of the Will so it can be said that the
Will in fact consisted of three pages and not two pages as alleged by the petitioner,
however, I am not convinced with this submission. In the cross examination of the
petitioner the alleged third page of the Will was never put to confront her in order to
substantiate the plea that the Will consists of three pages. Even in the cross
examination of PW-2 attesting witness of the Will no suggestion was given that the
Will was of three pages and not of two pages. The Will Ex. PW-1/H is of two pages
and even the handwritten endorsement at the end of it point out that it consisted of
only two pages. The alleged third page of the Will, photocopy of which was placed on
record by the respondent no. 2 does not bear any date or signatures of any attesting
witnesses. The alleged third page has already been found not a part of the Will as per
order dated 3-7-2008. The respondent no. 3 in his objection has described the entire
Will as forged and fabricated but now cannot be allowed to take a contradictory stand
that the third page is genuine and other two pages are forged on the ground that
admittedly the movable property was distributed in accordance with the alleged third
page among the legal heirs. In this case, the claim is made by the petitioner in respect
of one immovable property and one bank account and no claim is made in respect of
any movable property. Even if it is presumed that deceased during her life time
distributed her personal belongings, cash and jewellery in accordance with the third
page then also that third page has now become useless because the distribution of the
movable assets took place during life time of the deceased whereas the Will has to
take effect after the death of the testatrix. Accordingly, in this case only subject
matter remains is immovable property and the bank account.
Petitioner has denied the existence of this alleged third page and also denied having
possession of the same. She has also denied supplying of the copies of this alleged
third page to the respondents at the time of service of the petition. The reply is
supported by an affidavit of the petitioner, so in such situation also no direction can
be given to the petitioner to produce the original of alleged third page of the Will
which is being relied upon by the respondent no. 3 now. Petitioner infact is saying
that this third page has been fabricated by the respondents in connivance with each
other.
Accordingly, I find no merits in the application of respondent no. 3 especially when in
the cross examination of PW-1 and PW-2 no such third page was put for
confrontation and relying upon this alleged third page now is contradictory from the
contents of the objections filed to the petition. Application is thus, dismissed with
cost of Rs. 1000/- to be paid to the petitioner.”
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
12

14. Hereinabove, we have expansively recounted the part of the proceedings in the
Trial Court concerning the alleged third page of the Will.
As could be readily noticed, while the contesting respondents, one way or the other, kept on
insisting that there had been a third page of the Will but, per contra, existence of any such third page
of the Will in question was categorically denied by the appellant; rather the appellant alleged that
the said third page had been fabricated by the respondents in connivance with each other. The Trial
Court also accepted the submission of the appellant that no such third page existed, particularly
after noticing that the appellant was never confronted with any such third page of the Will. The Trial
Court even observed that distribution of movable assets of testatrix was complete during her lifetime
and the only subject-matter remaining was the immovable property and the bank account. The
relevance of these aspects shall appear in the later part of this judgment, when we shall be dealing
with the effect of a different stand taken by appellant in the High Court. FINDINGS OF THE TRIAL
COURT
15. Having glanced through the pleadings and evidence of the parties, having taken note of the
contents and frame of the Will in question, and having also taken note of the relevant parts of
proceedings before the Trial Court, we may look at the findings of the Trial Court in its judgment
dated 23.11.2009, particularly the reasons that weighed with it while declining the prayer for
probate of the Will in question.
15.1. As regards the objection of respondent No. 2 that the property in question was an ancestral
property, the Trial Court referred to the decision of this Court in Chiranjilal Shrilal Goanka v. Jasjit
Singh: (1993) 2 SCC 507 and held that the said objection would not be entertained because the
‘question of right, title, share and ownership is not to be decided in the probate proceedings’. The
Trial Court also found that the testatrix was of sound mind at the time of execution of the Will,
particularly when she was handling her own affairs including bank account and property; was
leading a very active life till her death; and was also attending club and driving her own car.
15.2. However, thereafter, the Trial Court took into account various circumstances which appeared
to be suspicious. In the first place, the Trial Court referred to the decisions in H. Venkatachala
Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma: AIR 1959 SC 443, Indu Bala Bose v. Manindra Chandra Bose:
(1982) 1 SCC 20 and Surendra Pal v. Dr. Saraswati Arora: (1974) 2 SCC 600 and observed that if
propounder of the Will takes an active part in the execution of the Will and receives substantial
benefit under it, then such a circumstance is generally treated as suspicious one. As regards the facts
of the case at hand, the Trial Court found that the appellant played an active role in execution of the
Will in question and at the same time, she was the major beneficiary thereunder where she was not
only given the first floor but also the terrace rights and all other portions of the property in question.
15.3. Secondly, the Trial Court was of the view that the exclusion of the only son from the immovable
property was also a suspicious circumstance. The Court took into consideration the birthday card
Ex. RW3/1 sent by the testatrix to respondent No. 2 and was of the view that the words of praise in
the said card belied the suggestion that the relationship between them was strained. The Trial Court
also took into consideration the family photographs making out that the testatrix was present at the
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
13

second marriage of respondent No. 2 and observed that the said photographs were not challenged or
questioned by the appellant. The Trial Court also observed that the testatrix would not have given
him the amount in the bank account if their relations were strained.
15.4. Thirdly, the Trial Court also found that the other daughter of the testatrix (the respondent No.
1 herein) virtually did not get any substantial share. The Trial Court was of the view that the
exclusion of respondent No. 1 from the Will, when there was no proof of strained relationship of
testatrix with her, made the Will unnatural and unfair; and this was another strong suspicious
circumstance to reject the Will.
15.5. Fourthly, the Trial Court did not feel satisfied about the manner of writing and execution of the
Will and observed that the testatrix had not completed her education and was not a computer
literate; that a few portions of the Will were handwritten and there were traces of pencil lines
beneath the handwritten portions, making out that the testatrix was asked to write as per dictation
on the particular portion; and that certain portions of the Will contained technical and legal words
not known to a layperson. The Trial Court observed that the relevant facts as to how the Will was
typed and how the testatrix was made to write the particular clause in the Will in her own
handwriting were not clarified and the manner of execution of Will was another suspicious
circumstance.
15.6. Fifthly, the Trial Court was of the view that the attesting witnesses were unreliable and the
possibility of PW-3 being bribed was not ruled out as the appellant had given an amount of Rs.
25,000/- to his daughter. On the other hand, PW-2 admitted in his cross-examination that he
hardly knew the testatrix.
15.7. Sixthly, the Trial Court also took into consideration the contradictions in the statements of the
witnesses, which raised doubts as to the genuineness to the story of the appellant. The Trial Court
pointed out that as per the appellant, she had no knowledge of the execution of the Will prior to
20.05.2003 but as per the testimony of PW-2, it was the appellant who called him on 18.05.2003 for
the purpose of attestation of the Will. 15.8. Seventhly, the Trial Court also observed that there were
vague recitals in the Will such as, ‘other portions of the building’, when the said property consisted
only of the ground floor and first floor.
16. While elaborately dealing with all the suspicious circumstances concerning the Will and
unreliability of the evidence led by the appellant, the Trial Court found that the appellant had not
been able to remove the suspicions and hence, dismissed the petition.
CONCURRENCE OF THE HIGH COURT
17. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of the Trial Court, the appellant approached the High
Court in FAO No. 36 of 2010 that has been considered and dismissed by the impugned judgment
dated 27.06.2014. Having regard to the questions involved, we may notice the reasons that prevailed
with the High Court in upholding the decision of the Trial Court in requisite details.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
14

17.1. In the impugned judgment dated 27.06.2014, the High Court in the first place took note of the
relevant material on record; the suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will in question as
indicated by the Trial Court; and the contentions of respective parties. Thereafter, the High Court
referred to the basic ingredients for due execution of a Will as per Section 63 of the Succession Act
and Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 6 and the principles exposited by this Court in the
cases of H. Venkatachala 6 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Evidence Act’. Iyengar v. B.N.
Thimmajamma (supra); Rani Purnima Debi v. Kumar Khagendra Narayan Deb: (1962) 3 SCR 195,
Smt. Jaswant Kaur v. Smt. Amrit Kaur and Ors.: (1977) 1 SCC 369; Babu Singh and Ors. v. Ram
Sahai @ Ram Singh: AIR 2008 SC 2485; Gurdial Kaur and Ors. v. Kartar Kaur and Ors.: 1998 SCR
(2) 486; P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar and Ors.: AIR 1995 SC 1852,
Benga Behera and Anr. v. Braja Kisore Nanda and Ors.: (2007) 9 SCC 728 and B. Venkatamuni v.
C.J. Ayodhya Ram Singh and Ors.: (2006) 13 SCC 449 as also in a Division Bench decision of
Madras High Court in J. Mathew and Ors. v. Leela Joseph : (2007) 5 MLJ 740 and observed that as
per settled law, mere proof of signatures on the Will was not sufficient to prove its due execution;
and it was the duty of the party seeking probate to satisfy the conscience of the Court as regards due
execution of the Will by the testator and for that matter, the Court can probe deeper into the matter
to satisfy its conscience that the testator/testatrix had duly executed the Will after understanding its
contents. The High Court, thus formulated the point for consideration as under:-
“28. The question for consideration is whether the evidence led by the appellant i.e.,
propounder satisfies the conscience of the court that the Will in question was duly
executed.” 17.2. Thereafter, the High Court took up the crucial finding of the Trial
Court that the evidence on record did not establish that while signing the Will Ex.
PW1/H, the testatrix understood the contents thereof.
17.2.1. In regard to this fundamental aspect as to whether the testatrix understood the
contents of the document Ex. PW1/H, the High Court meticulously examined the
material on record and observed that the appellant, in her evidence, did not mention
that the testatrix was aware of the contents of the Will. The High Court further
referred to the testimony of the appellant to the effect that she was not made aware
by the testatrix as to who had drawn and typed the Will in question; that she was
made aware about the Will only on the day of its execution; that she was not aware if
testatrix had discussed the Will with respondent Nos. 1 and 2; that she was not
directed by the testatrix to call respondent Nos. 1 and 2 on the day of execution of the
Will; and that though she remembered the testatrix writing something, but she was
unsure whether it was on the document of Will. A major discrepancy was observed by
the High Court in her deposition with regard to the attesting witnesses where the
appellant stated that the testatrix had discussed the contents of the Will with PW-2
and PW-3 while those witnesses denied the same in their evidence. Thus, after having
thoroughly examined the testimony of the appellant, the High Court concluded that
nothing was brought on record to show that the testatrix was aware of the contents of
the Will. The High Court said,-
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
15

“30. The evidence on record in this regard is examined. The appellant has nowhere stated in her
evidence by way of affidavit Ex.P1 that testatrix was aware of the contents of the Will Ex.PW1/H. In
her cross-examination, she has stated that her mother i.e. testatrix did not discuss the contents of
the Will Ex.PW1/H with her before drawing it nor her mother told her as to who had drawn and
typed the said Will. The appellant has further stated in cross-examination that she does not know
when Will Ex.PW1/H was got typed. She has further stated that she had come to know about the
said Will Ex.PW1/H only on 20-21 May, 2003. The appellant has also deposed that she does not
know whether her mother i.e., testatrix had discussed the Will Ex.PW 1/H with respondent no.2 or
respondent no.3. Her mother did not ask her to call respondent nos.2 and 3 on that day. In
cross-examination, she has further stated that her mother had discussed the contents of the Will
with the witnesses i.e. PW2 and PW3 whereas PW2 and PW3 in their evidence have denied the
same. The appellant has further deposed that she does not know if any professional or any deed
writer was engaged for drafting/typing of the Will Ex.PW 1/H. The appellant has also deposed that
on that day her mother had written something but she does not know whether it was on the Will or
something else. From her evidence, it cannot be said that testatrix was aware about the contents of
the Will Ex.PW1/H.” 17.2.2. The High Court also examined the evidence of attesting witnesses PW-2
Shri Urvinder S. Kohli and PW-3 Major General Manjit Ahluwalia, who deposed that the testatrix
did not discuss the contents of the Will with them nor did they question her about the same; and
that after they had arrived at the residence of testatrix, she went ahead to write something more on
the Will before signing it. The High Court observed that from their testimonies too, nothing was
proved if the testatrix understood the contents of the document in question and said,-
“ 33. Even from the evidence of attesting witnesses i.e. PW2 and PW3 it can’t be said that testatrix
had put her signatures on the Will Ex. PW1/H after understanding its contents or that while signing
she was aware of its contents.” 17.2.3. Proceeding further, the High Court also took note of the
statement of the respondent No. 1 that the testatrix was not even 10th pass; and also referred to the
statement of the appellant that she was not aware of the educational qualification of her mother but
her mother could read and write in the English language. The High Court referred to the fact that
the testatrix was not computer literate and had no legal knowledge; and the language used in the
Will showed that the same was drafted by a lawyer. The High Court observed that no evidence was
led in as to who drafted and typed the Will Ex. PW1/H and considered the same to be a suspicious
circumstance with reference to the decision of this Court in Smt. Jaswant Kaur (supra). The High
Court also took into account the feature that the document in question was partly typed and partly
handwritten with no plausible explanation for the same and found that the document was not
prepared in one sitting. Thus, after thorough analysis, the High Court concluded that from the
evidence led in by the appellant, it cannot be said that the testatrix had understood the typed
portion or that the same was read over to her before she put her signatures on the Will. Accordingly,
the High Court affirmed the findings of the Trial Court in regard to such a suspicious circumstance
while observing and finding as under: – “35. …The Will Ex. PW1/H is partly typed and partly hand
written i.e. opening and closing para of the Will Ex. PW1/H. The evidence shows that the Will Ex.
PW1/H was also not prepared in one sitting. The first and last para of Will Ex. PW1/H is in the
handwriting of testatrix. The rest of the Will Ex. PW1/H is typed one. No explanation has been given
in evidence as to why the Will is partly handwritten and partly typed. During arguments, learned
counsel for appellant has submitted that first and last para are handwritten so as to give more
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
16

weightage to the Will in question. However, the reasoning given is not understandable. Further, no
evidence is led by the appellant to show from where the Will in question was got typed. The first
para of Will in question gives the name and other details of testatrix and last para is the closing para
of the Will in question. The typed portion gives the details of alleged bequeath in the Will Ex.
PW1/H whereby major portion has been given to the appellant and one floor as per choice of the
appellant is alleged to have been bequeathed in favour of respondent No. 2. Reading the evidence
led by the appellant it can’t be said that the testatrix had understood the typed portion or same was
read over to her before she had put her signatures on the Will Ex. PW1/H. The learned ADJ has
rightly held the above as the suspicious circumstance…..” 17.3. The High Court thereafter examined
the bequeathing contents of the Will in question and observed that nothing was available in the
petition or evidence of the appellant as to why the major portion of immovable property was given
to her though she was not staying with the testatrix for about 20- 22 years and it was not her case
that she was looking after the testatrix who was a cancer patient. On the other side of the picture, the
High Court noticed that the widowed daughter of the testatrix (respondent No. 1 herein) was, at the
relevant time, living on the first floor of the house where testatrix was residing; and, as per the
evidence on record, respondent No. 1 was looking after her mother and was taking her to Army
Hospital. Having thus taken note of the overall scenario and setup, the High Court found it rather
inexplicable that the respondent No. 1 was left at the mercy of the appellant; that in the Will in
question, no time limit was provided as to when the appellant would construct the floors and about
the nature and quality of the construction; and that respondent No. 1 shall have to be dispossessed
for the purpose of the expected construction.
17.4. The High Court also dealt with another major factor pertaining to this case that the appellant,
the major beneficiary, indeed played an active role in execution of the Will in question; and noticed
material contradictions in the testimonies of appellant and her witness PW-2. The High Court found
that the appellant was unable to satisfy the conscience of the Court in regard to such suspicious
circumstance in the following passages:-
“40. Reading the Will in question, it is the appellant who is the major beneficiary of
the Will. The evidence on record shows that she has also played an active role in the
preparation of the alleged Will. She was present when the Will in question was
allegedly executed. The attesting witness Urvinder S Kohli, PW-2 is very well known
to the appellant being her friend for the past 30 years. He has deposed that he had
known deceased through appellant and later the appellant’s cousin’s son got married
to his daughter in the year 1994 and since 1994 he had visited testatrix only twice or
thrice on social occasions. Reading his evidence it can’t be said that he was close to
the testatrix. In these circumstances, testatrix could not have called him of her own
for attesting the Will Ex.PW1/H. Though in the evidence, appellant has deposed that
her mother i.e., testatrix had called the said witnesses whereas the witness PW2 has
deposed that on 18.5.2003, he was called by the appellant who told him to come to
her mother’s house on 20.5.2003 as her mother wanted to executed the Will.
41. The evidence on record shows that appellant has taken a prominent part in
execution of Will Ex.PW1/H which confers on her a substantial benefit worth crores
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
17

of rupees. This itself is a big suspicious circumstance as has been held by Supreme
Court in Niranjan Umesh Chandra Joshi vs. Mridula Jyoti Rao: 2007 (1) AD SC 477.
It has also been held by Supreme Court in Surinder Pal vs. Saraswati Arora: (1974) 2
SCC 600 that where propounder takes prominent part in the execution of Will which
confers on him a substantial benefit that is itself one of the suspicious circumstance
which he must remove by clear evidence. In the present case no evidence is led by
appellant to satisfy the conscience of the court to clear the aforesaid suspicious
circumstance existing at the time of making of Will Ex.PW1/H. The propounder was
required to remove the doubts by clear and satisfactory evidence.” 17.5. Turning on to
the respondent No. 2 (son of the testatrix), the High Court found that absolutely no
reason was provided in the Will for excluding him from the said immovable property
and for limiting his benefit under the Will to the balance amount in the savings bank
account of the testatrix. The High Court observed that though the appellant had
deposed that there were strained relations between the testatrix and respondent No.
2 but, on the contrary, the witness PW-3 Major General Manjit Ahluwalia, son of
sister of the testatrix, as also respondent No. 1 had deposed that their relations, in
fact, were satisfactory. The High Court again referred to the documentary evidence as
regards regular maintaining of good relations between the testatrix and her son, like
those of birthday card and the family photographs, and observed that if at all there
were strained relations, the testatrix would not have even bequeathed any amount to
her son. Again, after a thorough analysis of the evidence on record, the High Court
found that there was no sufficient evidence of strained relations between the testatrix
and her son to such an extent that she would have excluded him from her immovable
property. Hence, the exclusion of respondent No. 2 from bequeath was also taken to
be that of a grave suspicious circumstance casting doubt on the genuineness of the
Will in question. The High Court, inter alia, observed,-
“46. There is no evidence coming forth to explain the suspicious circumstance of excluding
respondent no.3 from bequeath of the immovable property. As noted above, there is no evidence
that deceased had understood the contents of the Will Ex.PW1/H before signing it. In this
background, exclusion of respondent no.3 is also a grave suspicious circumstance which has also
remained unexplained. The same cast doubt as to the genuineness of Will Ex.PW1/H.” 17.6. Yet
further, the High Court also noticed that though respondent No. 1 resided only one floor above the
testatrix and was also maintaining good relations with her, but only the appellant was called at the
time of execution of the Will and no reason was provided for not calling the respondent No. 1. That
apart, the High Court also took note of the fact that respondent No. 1 was made aware of the
execution of the Will only after three years from the date of its execution. The execution of the Will
in secrecy, without informing the other legal heirs, and without affording explanation for such an
act, was also considered as another unexplained suspicious circumstance. 17.7. The High Court also
referred to various contradictions in the testimonies of the appellant and the said two attesting
witnesses on the material aspects concerning the execution of Will by testatrix, particularly as to
how the handwritten portion was scribed on the document and as regards discussion concerning the
contents of the document; and found such contradictions to be serious in nature, creating doubt
about the execution of Will Ex. PW1/H in accordance with law. After examining the relevant parts of
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
18

evidence, the High Court observed and found as under:-
“48. Further, there are serious contradictions in the testimony of attesting witnesses
i.e. PW2 and PW3 and that of appellant on material aspects pertaining to the
execution of the Will. In affidavit Ex. P1 the appellant has stated that the testatrix had
brought out a partly typed Will and further wrote in her own hand the opening and
closing paragraphs of the Will Ex. PW1/H. In cross-examination, she has stated that
she does not know whether she had written on the Will or something else. Sh.
Urvinder S. Kohli PW2 has stated that the handwritten portion on the Will Ex.
PW1/H was written by the testatrix of her own. Sh. Manjit Ahluwalia PW3 has stated
in cross-examination that the testatrix was having one draft out of which she copied
something in her own handwriting on Will Ex. PW1/H. All the three witnesses have
deposed differently as to how handwritten portion was written on Will Ex. PW1/H.
There is also contradiction as regards discussion about the contents of Will Ex.
PW1/H by testatrix with the attesting witnesses. The appellant has stated in her
cross- examination that her mother had discussed the contents of Will with the
witnesses whereas both the attesting witnesses have denied that the contents of Will
were discussed by the testatrix. PW2 has also stated in the cross-examination that he
even did not question the testatrix on the same. There is also contradiction about the
manner of taking out of Will at the time the witnesses had reached the house of
testatrix. The attesting witness PW2 has deposed that the Will was not produced
before him when he was present with the testatrix and appellant. According to him,
when PW3 had come, only then the Will was produced. On the other hand, Sh. Manjit
Ahluwalia PW3 has deposed that when he had reached the house of testatrix Will Ex.
PW1/H had already been taken out by the testatrix before he reached her house. The
above contradictions are serious in nature and create a doubt about the execution of
Will Ex. PW1/H in accordance with law.” 17.8. Taking into comprehension the
aforesaid observations and findings, it is apparent that the High Court, after an
independent analysis of the evidence on record, concurred with the major findings of
the Trial Court as regards various suspicious circumstances which remained
unexplained and which operated against genuineness of the document propounded
as Will of the mother of the parties. However, that was not the end of the matter
because another doubtful factor was also analysed by the High Court as regards
payment of a sum of Rs. 25,000/- by the appellant to the daughter of the attesting
witness PW-3 Major General Manjit Ahluwalia, through cheque from an account
jointly maintained in the name of testatrix and the appellant but, after the death of
the testatrix. The contesting respondents claimed that the aforesaid payment was
made in order to garner favour from the attesting witness PW-3. In this regard, the
stand of the appellant had been that such an amount was paid not only to the
daughter of PW-3 but also to the daughter of respondent No. 1 and to the sons of
appellant as the testatrix wanted to gift the said amount to them. Interestingly, in
order to buttress this stand of the appellant that the amount was paid to the daughter
of PW-3 as per the wishes of testatrix, the learned counsel for the appellant before the
High Court referred to the alleged third page of the Will. After noticing such a
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
19

submission made on behalf of the appellant with reliance on the alleged third page of
the Will, the High Court referred to the very same proceedings of the Trial Court
which we have referred in detail hereinbefore, where the respondents wanted to
produce the alleged third page of the Will but the appellant denied the very existence
of any such third page of the Will in question. The High Court found that the said
third page of the Will was never produced before the Trial Court; and observed that
even if existing, the alleged third page of the Will does not dispel the suspicious
circumstances. This part of the discussion and observations of the High Court, in
paragraph 49 of the impugned judgment, could be usefully extracted as under: – “49.
It has also come in the evidence that Rs. 25000/-
was paid by the appellant to the daughter of the attesting witness Major General Manjit Ahluwalia
PW3 through cheque Ex. R3W1-C from account jointly in the name of testatrix and the appellant
after the death of testatrix. The stand of respondent No. 2 and 3 is that the aforesaid payment was
made in order to get favour from the attesting witness PW3 as such his evidence is not reliable. On
the other hand, the stand of the appellant is that the said amount was not only paid to the daughter
of PW3 but was also paid to the daughter of respondent No. 2 and to the son of appellant as the
deceased/testatrix wanted to gift the said amount to them. In support of the stand, learned counsel
for appellant has referred to the alleged third stage of Will in question. It may be mentioned that the
alleged third page of the Will Ex.PW1/H is never produced by the appellant. Rather, when the
respondent No. 3 had moved an application for production of the alleged third page of the Will,
appellant had denied the existence of said page. The third page of the Will is never proved before the
learned ADJ. Even assuming the alleged third page exists, the same does not dispel the suspicious
circumstances as have been noted above. In these circumstances, the contention of the appellant
that the alleged third page of Will Ex. PW1/H proves its validity has no force.” 17.9. After taking note
of the aforesaid inexplicable features, unusual circumstances and unreliability of the witnesses, and
finding no fault or malafide in the respondent No. 1 contesting the matter at the later stage, the High
Court in its impugned judgment dated 27.06.2014, while concurring with the findings of the Trial
Court, dismissed the appeal and held that mere signature on the Will by the testatrix was not
sufficient to prove that the said Will was duly executed after understanding the contents thereof.
The High Court concluded on the matter as follows:-
“51. In view of above discussion, the findings of learned ADJ that Will Ex.PW1/H is
surrounded by various suspicious circumstances which has remained unexplained
and the possibility of aforesaid Will not duly executed by the deceased after
understanding its contents are confirmed. No illegality or perversity is seen in the
findings given by the learned ADJ. No case is made out for interference with the
impugned judgment.” RIVAL CONTENTIONS The Appellant
18. Being aggrieved by the judgment so passed by the High Court dismissing her appeal and
maintaining rejection of her prayer for grant of probate, the petitioner-appellant has preferred this
appeal by special leave. Assailing the impugned judgments, learned counsel for the appellant has
strenuously contended that due execution of the Will as per the requirements of the Succession Act
having been proved in accordance with procedure prescribed by the Evidence Act; and no cogent
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
20

reason or circumstance having been established on record against the genuineness of the contested
Will, a clear case for grant of probate is made out but the Trial Court as also the High Court have
proceeded to reject the prayer of the appellant on entirely baseless considerations while doubting
the Will on the so-called suspicious circumstances, though there is none. 18.1. Elaborating on her
submissions, the learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that a Will has to be proved like
any other document but, it has to satisfy the requirements of Section 63 of the Succession Act in the
manner that for due execution, the testator has to sign or affix his mark on the Will or it has to be
signed by some other person in the presence of testator and under his direction; and the Will has to
be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen such signing or affixation by testator
or by other person acting as per the directions of the testator. Further to that, as per Section 68 of
the Evidence Act, at least one attesting witness has to be examined in proof of a Will. The learned
counsel would submit that in the present case, all the requirements of Section 63 of the Succession
Act are duly satisfied in the execution of the Will in question; and the same has been duly proved
with examination of both the attesting witnesses before the Court as PW-2 and PW-3. The learned
counsel has contended that the appellant having duly discharged her burden and nothing concrete
having been brought on record so as to create any legitimate suspicion, there is no reason to deny
probate as prayed for. 18.2. While asserting the case of the appellant for grant of probate in relation
to the Will in question, the learned counsel has, in the first place, questioned the standing and
stance of the respondents in attempting to raise certain issues about the Will in question.
18.2.1. As regards respondent No. 1, learned counsel for the appellant has contended that she has no
locus either to lead evidence or to doubt the validity and genuineness of the Will for the reason that
she did not file any objections before the Trial Court and as such, inevitably, had accepted the
execution of the Will in question as being the last testament of her mother. The learned counsel
would submit that the applications filed by respondent No. 1, for recall of the appellant for the
purpose of further cross-examination and for permission to file written statement were rejected by
the Trial Court and she did not challenge the orders so passed against her and thereby, such orders
have attained finality. The learned counsel has submitted, with reference to Section 268 of
Succession Act with Order VIII Rule 10 of CPC as also Order XIV Rule 1 (6) read with Order XV Rule
2 CPC, that the status of respondent No. 1 remains to be that of a defendant who is not at issue with
the plaintiff; and in the given circumstances, all the suggestions sought to be made on her behalf
deserve no consideration. With reference to the decision in Bachhaj Nahar v. Nilima Mandal and
Anr.: (2008) 17 SCC 491, the learned counsel has submitted that evidence led in without pleadings
by the respondent No. 1 remains inadmissible. The learned counsel has also submitted that it is for
the first time before this Court that a new plea of fact was introduced by the respondent No. 1 in the
written submissions as regards the status of relationship between the respondent No. 1 and her
mother; and that the provisions under Order VI Rule 7 of CPC prevent introduction of new grounds
of claim except by way of amendment. The learned counsel has emphatically argued that from the
very beginning, the premise of respondent No. 1 had been that she admitted the genuineness of the
Will and therefore, a stand contrary to the same cannot now be raised by her before this Court.
18.2.2. As regards respondent No. 2, learned counsel for the appellant has referred to the objections
filed by him and has submitted that most of the objections being totally baseless and untenable,
were clearly rejected by the Trial Court like those suggested as if the Will in question was forged and
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
21

fabricated or those seeking to question the disposing state of mind of the testatrix. The learned
counsel has also submitted that the respondent No. 2 went on to suggest ancestral character of the
property in question and the Trial Court has rightly rejected such objections too with reference to
the decision in Chiranjilal (supra) because title of the property is not to be decided in probate
proceeding. The learned counsel has further submitted that the suggestions by this respondent
about his cordial relations with the testatrix have not been established on record and a few
photographs and letters produced by him do not establish that he was in thick of relations with the
testatrix; rather, as per the evidence on record, he remained away and detached from the family and
he was not even aware about the ailment of the testatrix. Thus, according to the learned counsel,
even the objections of respondent do not make out a case of any such suspicious circumstance for
which the genuineness of the Will in question may be doubted. 18.3. As regards the testimonies of
the two attesting witnesses, the learned counsel would submit that they have clearly proved the
material facts relating to due execution of Will and attestation by them; and the doubts sought to be
thrown upon them with reference to some minor and natural discrepancies, or their acquaintance
with the appellant are of no consequence. The learned counsel has contended that the Will was
executed in the year 2003 while the testimonies of the witnesses were recorded only in the year
2008 and therefore, minor variations on details as to who arrived first or what portion was written
on the Will etc., do not affect the substance of their evidence.
18.4. The learned counsel has referred to various decisions like those in H. Venkatachala Iyengar
(supra), Madhukar D. Shende v. Tarabai Aba Shedage: (2002) 2 SCC 85; and Joyce Primrose
Prestor v. Vera Marie Vas: (1996) 9 SCC 324 to submit that though the initial onus to prove the Will
is on the propounder but once that burden is discharged, any suspicion alone cannot form the
foundation of judicial verdict; and any suggestion about suspicion ought to be examined by the
Court while guarding against conjectures and mere fantasy of a doubting mind. The learned counsel
has iterated the principles in the decisions aforesaid that there ought to be real, germane and valid
suspicious features for which the propounded Will may be called in question, but there had been no
such feature or circumstance in the present case.
18.5. As regards the manner of execution of the Will in question, the learned counsel has submitted
that the ratio of Joyce Primrose Prestor (supra), that greater degree of presumption arises in the
case of a “holograph” Will, is applicable to the present case too, where the significant contents
relating to the particulars of the testatrix and her unequivocal bequeath, in the opening and
concluding passages, were duly written in her own hand by the testatrix.
18.6. While dealing with the suspicious circumstances taken into consideration by the Trial Court
and the High Court, the learned counsel has submitted that the alleged circumstances were either
non-existent, or were not pleaded, or were not of any suspicion at all. 18.6.1. The learned counsel
would submit that the circumstances like the appellant being the major beneficiary; she playing an
active role in execution of the Will; exclusion of son from the benefit of estate; the other daughter
virtually not getting any share; and the manner of writing of the Will were neither specifically
pleaded nor they operate against the genuineness of the Will in question. Further, according to the
learned counsel, the circumstances like non-information of execution of Will to the legal heirs;
vague contents of Will; and contradictions in the statements of witnesses are, on the face of it,
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
22

imaginary and conjectural and could only be ignored.
18.6.2. The learned counsel has contended, with reference to the decisions in Leela Rajagopal and
Ors. v. Kamala Menon Cocharan and Ors.:
(2014) 15 SCC 570, Ved Mitra Verma v. Dharam Deo Verma: (2014) 15 SCC 578;
Mahesh Kumar v. Vinod Kumar and Ors.: (2012) 4 SCC 387;
Savithri and Ors. v. Karthyayani Amma and Ors.: (2007) 11 SCC 621; Pentakota Satyanarayana and
Ors. v. Pentakota Seetharatnam and Ors.: (2005) 8 SCC 67; Uma Devi Nambiar and Ors.v. T.C.
Sidhan:
(2004) 2 SCC 321; Ramabai Padmakar Patil and Ors. v. Rukminibai Vishnu
Vekhande and Ors.: (2003) 8 SCC 537 and Rabindra Nath Mukherjee and Anr. v.
Panchanan Banerjee and Ors.: (1995) 4 SCC 459, that mere presence of the
propounder/beneficiary of a Will at the time of its execution; or exclusion of the
natural heirs from any benefit; or acquaintance of the propounder with any witness
are not of such suspicious circumstances as to create legitimate doubts on the
genuineness of the Will.
18.6.3. As regards the question of monetary benefits to the attesting witnesses, it is maintained on
behalf of the appellant that there had not been any monetary benefit to PW-2; and monetary benefit
to the daughter of PW-3 has to be seen in the background that the said witness is a Major General
and was closely related to the testatrix; there is no allegation as to the credibility of the said witness;
and the frivolous doubt is being raised on his credibility only where an amount of Rs. 25,000/- ‘out
of love and affection’ has been given in the year 2006.
18.7. Thus, it is submitted that the Will in question is the genuine last Will of the mother of parties;
and the appellant being the executor, may be granted probate as prayed for.
19. While countering the submissions made on behalf of the appellant, learned counsel for the
respondent No. 2, son of testatrix who had filed the objections and has consistently contested the
matter, has recounted the suspicious circumstances taken into account by the Trial Court and the
High Court and has contended that the appellant has utterly failed to explain any of them and hence,
the Will in question cannot be said to have been made by the testatrix after understanding the
meaning and purport of its contents. 19.1. In the forefront of arguments, learned counsel for the
respondent No. 2 has submitted that the appellant, who is admittedly the major beneficiary of the
disputed bequest, indeed played a prominent role in execution of the Will in question and then, tried
to deliberately conceal this fact of her active role in making of the document. The learned counsel
has elaborated on these submissions with reference to the pleadings and averments of the appellant
at various stages of proceedings where she consistently maintained that she ‘had role in the making
and execution’ of the Will in question. The learned counsel has also referred to the statement of the
appellant in the cross-examination to the effect that the testatrix did not ask her to find witnesses to
the Will and that she might have called the witnesses to the Will on her own. These assertions of the
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
23

appellant, according to the learned counsel, are effectively contradicted by PW-2 Urvinder S Kohli,
who maintained that it was the appellant who, on 18.05.2003, asked him to come to the testatrix’s
house and thereupon he agreed to come on 20.05.2003. With reference to the decision in H.
Ventakachala Iyengar (supra), the learned counsel has argued that when the propounder plays an
active role in execution of Will and gets major benefit thereunder, that itself is a suspicious
circumstance and the propounder must remove the suspicion by clear and satisfactory evidence,
which the appellant has failed to adduce.
19.2. Further, the learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 has referred to the other parts of the
testimony of PW-2 Urvinder S Kohli to submit that this witness was barely known to the testatrix
whereas he was close to the appellant for about 30 years. With reference to the decision of this Court
in Ramchandra Rambux v. Champabai and Ors.: AIR 1965 SC 354 and that of Delhi High Court in
Rajesh Chand and Ors. v. Dayawati and Ors.:
ILR (1981) 2 Delhi 477, the learned counsel has contended that closeness of attesting
witness of the Will with the propounder is itself a suspicious circumstance; and the
appellant has failed to explain this circumstance either.
19.3. The learned counsel for the respondent has further made scathing remarks in
relation to the bequest as proposed in the Will in question and has submitted that
without any rhyme or reason, such unjust and unreasonable distribution of the assets
of the testatrix has been proposed which was not likely to be made by the mother of
parties, particularly when she had nothing against her son and against the other
daughter.
19.3.1. The learned counsel would submit that in fact, the other daughter (respondent
No. 1) of the testatrix was a widow with an unmarried daughter;
and she had been given the first floor of the house (which was the property of testatrix) for
residence; and she was taking care of testatrix, who was suffering from cancer. In the given
circumstances, there was no reason that testatrix would have left her widowed and needy daughter
at the mercy of the appellant with vague and uncertain conditions of raising upper story
construction by the appellant, as found in the Will in question. The learned counsel would also
submit that the bequeath made by the testatrix could be limited to her property alone and cannot
include a property constructed by another person; that a property constructed using one’s own
money will be the exclusive property of that person and as such, the conditional bequest made in the
present case, to appear as if the respondent No. 1 was likely to get some property, had, in fact, been
sham and illusory. According to the learned counsel, such wordings in the Will as also the payments
and handing over car to the daughter of respondent No. 1 seems to have precluded her from
contesting the matter in the first place but that does not give any weight or support to the Will in
question.
19.3.2. While relying on the same decisions and with reference to the material on record, the learned
counsel has submitted that respondent No. 2, though having remained away because of his
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
24

enlistment in the Army, had always been in good terms with his parents; and there was no reason
that his mother, the testatrix, would have given him only a pittance of amount in the bank while
disinheriting him from the immovable property. 19.3.3. The learned counsel has relied on the
decision in Rani Purnima Debi (supra) and has also referred to the decision in Ram Piari v.
Bhagwant and Ors.: AIR 1990 SC 1742 to submit that disinheritance among heirs of equal degrees
without providing any reason for exclusion of daughter also amounts to a suspicious circumstance.
19.4. The learned counsel has also questioned the manner of writing and executing the document in
question. The learned counsel has referred to the inconsistencies in the depositions of the witnesses
in regard to the questions as whether the contents of the Will in question were made known to the
testatrix and whether the same were discussed with the witnesses. The learned counsel would
submit that the testatrix was barely 10th standard pass and was, obviously not conversant with such
legal jargon as would appear in the body of the Will in question. The appellant has attempted to say
that she had no role in typing/scribing of the document and as per the witnesses, the contents were
not discussed with them. In such a scenario, there remains another unexplained suspicious
circumstance, as to who had drafted the Will in question and who prepared the alleged note for the
testatrix wherefrom, she was to write at the opening and closing parts of the Will. The learned
counsel has submitted that when the main part of the Will was typed, it is questionable why the
inconsequential portion was handwritten; and these lacunas in the evidence of the appellant raises a
possibility that the Will was neither prepared nor understood by the testatrix. The learned counsel
has referred to the decision in Krishan Dass Gupta v. The State & Ors: 2012 SCC OnLine DEL 977
19.5. Another long deal of arguments by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 has been with
reference to the alleged third page of the Will. The learned counsel has referred to the very same
proceedings in the Trial Court which we have recounted hereinbefore; and has submitted that in the
Trial Court, appellant consistently maintained that there was no third page of the Will but when the
issue of payment of a sum of Rs. 25,000/- to the daughter of the attesting witness PW-3 cropped up
before the High Court, such a payment was sought to be justified with reference to the very same
third page of the Will in question. Such shifting stand of the appellant, according to the learned
counsel, gives rise to more suspicions; and it appears seriously questionable if the Will in question
was indeed the last Will of the testatrix and was executed with the contents as desired by her.
20. On the other flank of opposition, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has maintained that this
respondent has all through disputed the very execution of the Will by her mother; and the
suspicious circumstances having not been removed, the prayer for grant of probate has rightly been
rejected.
20.1. In the first place, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has vehemently countered the
submissions that this respondent had accepted the claim of the appellant for probate of the Will in
question and she is not entitled to make the submissions in contest. The learned counsel has
referred to the facts that even if this respondent did not file her written statement, she indeed led
evidence rebutting the case of the appellant and the Courts have returned concurrent findings that
her contest was neither an afterthought nor malafide. The learned counsel has referred to the
aforementioned decisions in H. Venkatachala Iyengar, Rani Purnima Debi and Smt. Jaswant Kaur
to submit that Probate Court is a Court of conscience; and where the propounder is to satisfy the
conscience of the Court with removal of suspicious circumstances, the respondent No 1, elder and
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
25

widowed daughter of the testatrix, has every right to make submissions to assist the Court in such an
enquiry. Without prejudice, the learned counsel has further submitted that even in a civil case where
right of filing written statement is closed, the defendant is not precluded from demonstrating that
the evidence led by the plaintiff is not sufficient to make out a case for grant of relief as prayed for.
The learned counsel has, inter alia, referred to Section 58 of the Evidence Act; Order VIII Rule 5(2)
and Order VIII Rule 10 CPC and has relied on the decision in Balraj Taneja and Anr. v. Sunil Madan
and Anr.: (1999) 8 SCC 396. The learned counsel has also pointed out that appellant never objected
to the evidence of the respondent No. 1 and while relying on the decision in Modula India v.
Kamakshya Singh Deo: (1988) 4 SCC 619, has contended that the submissions of respondent No. 1
cannot be discarded. 20.2. The learned counsel has referred to the position of respondent No. 1 and
her relationship with the testatrix with the submissions that respondent No. 1 is the eldest daughter
of the testatrix, being 10 years older to the appellant and three years older to the respondent No. 2;
that the testatrix being aware of her adverse circumstances, had given her the first floor of the
property (which is the subject-matter of the present proceeding); that the relationship between the
testatrix and the respondent No. 1 had always been very good; that testatrix being a cancer patient,
the respondent No. 1 was taking her for treatment to Army Hospital; that due to the physical
proximity while residing in the same building, the testatrix and the respondent No. 1 had special
bonds between them. In the given setup, according to the learned counsel, it seems quite unnatural
that the testatrix would leave the respondent No. 1 at the mercy of appellant with such uncertain
stipulations as contained in the contested Will. 20.3. Arguing further, the learned counsel has
contended that though the appellant has attempted to suggest that the respondent No. 1 was
excluded from the first floor of the property in question but, there had not been any reason for such
exclusion. The learned counsel has contended what has been created by the Will in question is only
an illusory and vague bequest in relation to the respondent No. 1 for: a) the bequest to respondent
No.1 is of a floor above the first floor, which is not in existence; b) no time frame is provided within
which the appellant may choose to execute either of the two options and no corresponding option is
provided to respondent No.1 meaning thereby, that the bequest made by virtue of the Will in favour
of respondent No.1 has been indefinitely postponed; c) the entire property is vested in the appellant
immediately upon the demise of the testatrix including the bequest made to respondent No. 1; and
d) the nature and quality of the expected construction has not been specified. According to the
learned counsel, practically there is no effective bequest in relation to the respondent No. 1 and
there is no reason for the testatrix adopting the course as suggested.
20.4. The learned counsel has relied on the decisions of this Court in B. Venkatamuni v. C.J.
Ayodhya Ram Singh & Ors. : (2006) 13 SCC 449; H. Ventakachala Iyengar; and Rani Purnima Debi
(supra) amongst others, to submit that the Probate Court can investigate into the matter of a Will
despite the fact that the signature found thereon has been proved or ingredients of Section 68 of the
Evidence Act has been complied with. The learned counsel has referred to the definition of the
expression “suspicion” in P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon and has also relied upon the
decision in Indu Bala (supra) to submit that suspicion permits the Court to realistically imagine any
doubtful or distrustful facet of a case; and in testamentary jurisdiction, the Courts are permitted to
ferret out doubtful circumstances, which cannot be described as conjecture or surmise. 20.5. The
learned counsel has again recounted various circumstances, including manner of making of the Will
and contradictions/inconsistencies in the statements of the witnesses examined by the appellant,
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
26

which have been taken into account in the impugned judgments and have also been referred by the
learned counsel for the respondent No. 2; which need not be repeated. The learned counsel has also
placed before us a flow chart reflecting thirteen aspects of findings, including those of suspicious
circumstances, which have been returned concurrently against the appellant and has contended that
no case for interference with such concurrent findings is made out. The counsel has additionally
relied on the decision in Apoline D’Souza v. John D’Souza: AIR 2007 SC 2219. 20.6. In another line
of arguments, learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 has contended that the Will in question
cannot have greater sanctity only because the opening and closing parts are handwritten; rather it is
strange that the testatrix chose not to write the main bequest by hand and then, the handwritten
portion of the Will in question is placed in a squeezed manner and is not attested by any witness.
The learned counsel would submit that such interlineations only go to show that additions have
been made in the Will subsequent to its execution and failure to assign the reason behind such a
course is fatal to the case put up by the propounder. The learned counsel has relied on the decision
in Dayananadi v. Rukma D. Suvarna & Ors.: (2012) 1 SCC 510 in support of these contentions.
21. We have bestowed anxious consideration to the rival submissions with reference to the law
applicable and have also scanned through all the records pertaining to this case, including the
records of the Trial Court and the High Court.
WILL – PROOF AND SATISFACTION OF THE COURT
22. As noticed, the basic point for determination in this appeal is as to whether the Trial Court and
the High Court were justified in declining to grant probate in relation to the Will dated 20.05.2003
as prayed for. Obviously, a just and proper determination of this point would revolve around the
legal principles applicable as also the relevant factual aspects of the case. Before entering into the
factual aspects and the questions in controversy, appropriate it would be to take note of the
applicable legal provisions and principles concerning execution of a Will, its proof, and its
acceptance by the Court.
23. It remains trite that a Will is the testamentary document that comes into operation after the
death of the testator. The peculiar nature of such a document has led to solemn provisions in the
statutes for making of a Will and for its proof in a Court of law. Section 59 of the Succession Act
provides that every person of sound mind, not being a minor, may dispose of his property by Will. A
Will or any portion thereof, the making of which has been caused by fraud or coercion or by any
such importunity that has taken away the free agency of the testator, is declared to be void under
Section 61 of the Succession Act; and further, Section 62 of the Succession Act enables the maker of
a Will to make or alter the same at any time when he is competent to dispose of his property by Will.
Chapter III of Part IV of the Succession Act makes the provision for execution of unprivileged Wills
(as distinguished from privileged Wills provided for in Chapter IV) with which we are not concerned
in this case.
23.1. Sections 61 and 63 of the Succession Act, relevant for the present purpose, could be usefully
extracted as under: – “61. Will obtained by fraud, coercion or importunity.- A Will or any part of a
Will, the making of which has been caused by fraud or coercion, or by such importunity as takes
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
27

away the free agency of the testator, is void.
*** *** ***
63. Execution of unprivileged Wills.-Every testator, not being a soldier employed in an expedition or
engaged in actual warfare, or an airman so employed or engaged, or a mariner at sea, shall execute
his Will according to the following rules:-
(a) The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the Will, or it shall be signed by
some other person in his presence and by his direction.
(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of the person signing for
him, shall be so placed that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to give effect
to the writing as a Will.
(c) The Will shall be attested by two or more witness, each of whom has seen the
testator sign or affix his mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will,
in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator
a personal acknowledgment of his signature or mark, or the signature of such other
person; and each of the witnesses shall sign the Will in the presence of the testator,
but it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time,
and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.” 23.2. Elaborate provisions
have been made in Chapter VI of the Succession Act (Sections 74 to 111), for
construction of Wills which, in their sum and substance, make the intention of
legislature clear that any irrelevant misdescription or error is not to operate against
the Will; and approach has to be to give effect to a Will once it is found to have been
executed in the sound state of mind by the testator while exercising his own free will.
However, as per Section 81 of the Succession Act, extrinsic evidence is inadmissible
in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency in the Will; and as per Section 89 thereof, a
Will or bequest not expressive of any definite intention is declared void for
uncertainty. Sections 81 and 89 read as under:-
“81. Extrinsic evidence inadmissible in case of patent ambiguity or deficiency.- Where
there is an ambiguity or deficiency on the face of a Will, no extrinsic evidence as to
the intentions of the testator shall be admitted.
*** *** ***
89. Will or bequest void for uncertainty.- A Will or bequest not expressive of any
definite intention is void for uncertainty.” Moreover, it is now well settled that when
the Will is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, the Court would expect that the
legitimate suspicion should be removed before the document in question is accepted
as the last Will of the testator.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
28

23.3. As noticed, as per Section 63 of the Succession Act, the Will ought to be attested
by two or more witnesses. Hence, any document propounded as a Will cannot be
used as evidence unless at least one attesting witness has been examined for the
purpose of proving its execution, if such witness is available and is capable of giving
evidence as per the requirements of Section 68 of the Evidence Act, that reads as
under: – “68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.-If a
document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one
attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if
there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and
capable of giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a Will, which has been registered in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its
execution by the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically
denied.”
24. We may now take note of the relevant principles settled by the consistent
decisions in regard to the process of examination of a Will when propounded before a
Court of law.
24.1. In the case of H. Venkatachala Iyengar (supra), a 3-Judge Bench of this Court
traversed through the vistas of the issues related with execution and proof of Will and
enunciated a few fundamental guiding principles that have consistently been
followed and applied in almost all the cases involving such issues. The synthesis and
exposition by this Court in paragraphs 18 to 22 of the said decision could be usefully
reproduced as under:-
“18. What is the true legal position in the matter of proof of wills? It is well known
that the proof of wills presents a recurring topic for decision in courts and there are a
large number of judicial pronouncements on the subject. The party propounding a
will or otherwise making a claim under a will is no doubt seeking to prove a
document and, in deciding how it is to be proved, we must inevitably refer to the
statutory provisions which govern the proof of documents. S. 67 and 68, Evidence Act
are relevant for this purpose. Under S. 67, if a document is alleged to be signed by any
person, the signature of the said person must be proved to be in his handwriting, and
for proving such a handwriting under Ss. 45 and 47 of the Act the opinions of experts
and of persons acquainted with the handwriting of the person concerned are made
relevant. Section 68 deals with the proof of the execution of the document required
by law to be attested; and it provides that such a document shall not be used as
evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of
proving its execution. These provisions prescribe the requirements and the nature of
proof which must be satisfied by the party who relies on a document in a Court of
law. Similarly, Ss. 59 and 63 of the Indian Succession Act are also relevant. Section 59
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
29

provides that every person of sound mind, not being a minor, may dispose of his
property by will and the three illustrations to this section indicate what is meant by
the expression "a person of sound mind" in the context. Section 63 requires that the
testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or it shall be signed by some other
person in his presence and by his direction and that the signature or mark shall be so
made that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a
will. This section also requires that the will shall be attested by two or more witnesses
as prescribed. Thus the question as to whether the will set up by the propounder is
proved to be the last will of the testator has to be decided in the light of these
provisions. Has the testator signed the will? Did he understand the nature and effect
of the dispositions in the will? Did he put his signature to the will knowing what it
contained?
Stated broadly it is the decision of these questions which determines the nature of the
finding on the question of the proof of wills. It would prima facie be true to say that
the will has to be proved like any other document except as to the special
requirements of attestation prescribed by S. 63 of the Indian Succession Act. As in
the case of proof of other documents so in the case of proof of wills it would be idle to
expect proof with mathematical certainty. The test to be applied would be the usual
test of the satisfaction of the prudent mind in such matters.
19. However, there is one important feature which distinguishes wills from other
documents. Unlike other documents the will speaks from the death of the testator,
and so, when it is propounded or produced before a Court, the testator who has
already departed the world cannot say whether it is his will or not; and this aspect
naturally introduces an element of solemnity in the decision of the question as to
whether the document propounded is proved to be the last will and testament of the
departed testator.
Even so, in dealing with the proof of wills the Court will start on the same enquiry as in the case of
the proof of documents. The propounder would be called upon to show by satisfactory evidence that
the will was signed by the testator, that the testator at the relevant time was in a sound and
disposing state of mind, that he understood the nature and effect of the dispositions and put his
signature to the document of his own free will. Ordinarily when the evidence adduced in support of
the will is disinterested, satisfactory and sufficient to prove the sound and disposing state of the
testator's mind and his signature as required by law, Courts would be justified in making a finding in
favour of the propounder. In other words, the onus on the propounder can be taken to be discharged
on proof of the essential facts just indicated.
20. There may, however, be cases in which the execution of the will may be surrounded by
suspicious circumstances. The alleged signature of the testator may be very shaky and doubtful and
evidence in support of the propounder's case that the signature in question is the signature of the
testator may not remove the doubt created by the appearance of the signature; the condition of the
testator's mind may appear to be very feeble and debilitated; and evidence adduced may not succeed
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
30

in removing the legitimate doubt as to the mental capacity of the testator; the dispositions made in
the will may appear to be unnatural, improbable or unfair in the light of relevant circumstances; or,
the will may otherwise indicate that the said dispositions may not be the result of the testator's free
will and mind. In such cases the Court would naturally expect that all legitimate suspicions should
be completely removed before the document is accepted as the last will of the testator. The presence
of such suspicious circumstances naturally tends to make the initial onus very heavy; and, unless it
is satisfactorily discharged, Courts would be reluctant to treat the document as the last will of the
testator. It is true that, if a caveat is filed alleging the exercise of undue influence, fraud or coercion
in respect of the execution of the will propounded, such pleas may have to be proved by the
caveators; but, even without such pleas circumstances may raise a doubt as to whether the testator
was acting of his own free will in executing the will, and in such circumstances, it would be a part of
the initial onus to remove any such legitimate doubts in the matter.
21. Apart from the suspicious circumstances to which we have just referred in some cases the wills
propounded disclose another infirmity. Propounders themselves take a prominent part in the
execution of the wills which confer on them substantial benefits. If it is shown that the propounder
has taken a prominent part in the execution of the will and has received substantial benefit under it,
that itself is generally treated as a suspicious circumstance attending the execution of the will and
the propounder is required to remove the said suspicion by clear and satisfactory evidence. It is in
connection with wills that present such suspicious circumstances that decisions of English Courts
often mention the test of the satisfaction of judicial conscience. It may be that the reference to
judicial conscience in this connection is a heritage from similar observations made by ecclesiastical
Courts in England when they exercised jurisdiction with reference to wills; but any objection to the
use of the word ‘conscience’ in this context would, in our opinion, be purely technical and academic,
if not pedantic. The test merely emphasizes that, in determining the question as to whether an
instrument produced before the Court is the last will of the testator, the Court is deciding a solemn
question and it must be fully satisfied that it had been validly executed by the testator who is no
longer alive.
22. It is obvious that for deciding material questions of fact which arise in applications for probate
or in actions on wills, no hard and fast or inflexible rules can be laid down for the appreciation of the
evidence. It may, however, be stated generally that a propounder of the will has to prove the due and
valid execution of the will and that if there are any suspicious circumstances surrounding the
execution of the will the propounder must remove the said suspicions from the mind of the Court by
cogent and satisfactory evidence. It is hardly necessary to add that the result of the application of
these two general and broad principles would always depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case and on the nature and quality of the evidence adduced by the parties. It is quite true that,
as observed by Lord Du Parcq in Harmes v. Hinkson, 50 Cal W N 895 : (AIR 1946 PC 156), "where a
will is charged with suspicion, the rules enjoin a reasonable scepticism, not an obdurate persistence
in disbelief. They do not demand from the Judge, even in circumstances of grave suspicion, a
resolute and impenetrable incredulity. He is never required to close his mind to the truth". It would
sound platitudinous to say so, but it is nevertheless true that in discovering truth even in such cases
the judicial mind must always be open though vigilant, cautious and circumspect.” (emphasis
supplied) 24.2. In Rani Purnima Debi (supra), this Court referred to the aforementioned decision in
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
31

H. Venkatachala Iyengar and further explained the principles which govern the proving of a Will as
follows:-
“5. Before we consider the facts of this case it is well to set out the principles which
govern the proving of a will. This was considered by this Court in H. Venkatachala
Iyengar v. B. N. Thimmajamma, (1959) Supp (1) SCR 426: AIR 1959 SC 443. It was
observed in that case that the mode of proving a will did not ordinarily differ from
that of proving any other document except as to the special requirement of
attestation prescribed in the case of a will by S. 63 of the Indian Succession Act. The
onus of proving the will was on the propounder and in the absence of suspicious
circumstances surrounding the execution of the will proof of testamentary capacity
and signature of the testator as required by law was sufficient to discharge the onus.
Where, however, there were suspicious circumstances, the onus would be on the
propounder to explain them to the satisfaction of the Court before the will could be
accepted as genuine. If the caveator alleged undue influence, fraud or coercion, the
onus would be on him to prove the same. Even where there were no such pleas but
the circumstances gave rise to doubts, it was for the propounder to satisfy the
conscience of the Court. Further, what are suspicious circumstances was also
considered in this case. The alleged signature of the testator might be very shaky and
doubtful and evidence in support of the propounder's case that the signature in
question was the signature of the testator might not remove the doubt created by the
appearance of the signature. The condition of the testator's mind might appear to be
very feeble and debilitated and evidence adduced might not succeed in removing the
legitimate doubt as to the mental capacity of the testator; the dispositions made in
the will might appear to be unnatural, improbable or unfair in the light of relevant
circumstances; or the will might otherwise indicate that the said dispositions might
not be the result of the testator's free will and mind. In such cases, the Court would
naturally expect that all legitimate suspicions should be completely removed before
the document was accepted as the last will of the testator. Further, a propounder
himself might take a prominent part in the execution of the will which conferred on
him substantial benefits. If this was so it was generally treated as a suspicious
circumstance attending the execution of the will and the propounder was required to
remove the doubts by clear and satisfactory evidence. But even when where there
suspicious circumstances and the propounder succeeded in removing them, the
Court would grant probate, though the will might be unnatural and might cut off
wholly or in part near relations.” (emphasis supplied) 24.3. In the case of Indu Bala
Bose (supra), this Court again said,-
“7. This Court has held that the mode of proving a Will does not ordinarily differ from that of
proving any other document except to the special requirement of attestation prescribed in the case
of a Will by Section 63 of the Succession Act. The onus of proving the Will is on the propounder and
in the absence of suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will, proof of
testamentary capacity and the signature of the testator as required by law is sufficient to discharge
the onus. Where however there are suspicious circumstances, the onus is on the propounder to
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
32

explain them to the satisfaction of the court before the court accepts the Will as genuine. Even where
circumstances give rise to doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the conscience of the court. The
suspicious circumstances may be as to the genuineness of the signatures of the testator, the
condition of the testator's mind, the dispositions made in the Will being unnatural, improbable or
unfair in the light of relevant circumstances, or there might be other indications in the Will to show
that the testator's mind was not free. In such a case the court would naturally expect that all
legitimate suspicions should be completely removed before the document is accepted as the last Will
of the testator. If the propounder himself takes a prominent part in the execution of the Will which
confers a substantial benefit on him, that is also a circumstance to be taken into account, and the
propounder is required to remove the doubts by clear and satisfactory evidence. If the propounder
succeeds in removing the suspicious circumstances the court would grant probate, even if the Will
might be unnatural and might cut off wholly or in part near relations.
8 . Needless to say that any and every circumstance is not a “suspicious” circumstance. A
circumstance would be “suspicious” when it is not normal or is not normally expected in a normal
situation or is not expected of a normal person.” (emphasis supplied) 24.4. We may also usefully
refer to the principles enunciated in the case of Jaswant Kaur (supra) for dealing with a Will
shrouded in suspicion, as follows: – “9. In cases where the execution of a will is shrouded in
suspicion, its proof ceases to be a simple lis between the plaintiff and the defendant. What,
generally, is an adversary proceeding becomes in such cases a matter of the court's conscience and
then the true question which arises for consideration is whether the evidence led by the propounder
of the will is such as to satisfy the conscience of the court that the will was duly executed by the
testator. It is impossible to reach such satisfaction unless the party which sets up the will offers a
cogent and convincing explanation of the suspicious circumstances surrounding the making of the
will.” (emphasis supplied) 24.5. In the case of Uma Devi Nambiar (supra), this Court extensively
reviewed the case law dealing with a Will, including the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
the case of Shashi Kumar Banerjee and Ors. v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee and Ors.: AIR 1964 SC 529,
and observed that mere exclusion of the natural heirs or giving of lesser share to them, by itself, will
not be considered to be a suspicious circumstance. This Court observed, inter alia, as under:-
“15. Section 63 of the Act deals with execution of unprivileged Wills. It lays down that
the testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the Will or it shall be signed by some
other person in his presence and by his direction. It further lays down that the Will
shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the testator
signing or affixing his mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will,
in the presence and by the direction of the testator and each of the witnesses shall
sign the Will in the presence of the testator. Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (in short the “Evidence Act”) mandates examination of one attesting witness in
proof of a Will, whether registered or not. The law relating to the manner and onus of
proof and also the duty cast upon the court while dealing with a case based upon a
Will has been examined in considerable detail in several decisions of this Court …….
A Constitution Bench of this Court in Shashi Kumar Banerjee's case succinctly
indicated the focal position in law as follows: (AIR p. 531, para 4) "The mode of
proving a Will does not ordinarily differ from that of proving any other document
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
33

except as to the special requirement of attestation prescribed in the case of a Will by
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act. The onus of proving the Will is on the
propounder and in the absence of suspicious circumstances surrounding the
execution of the Will, proof of testamentary capacity and the signature of the testator
as required by law is sufficient to discharge the onus. Where however there are
suspicious circumstances, the onus is on the propounder to explain them to the
satisfaction of the court before the court accepts the Will as genuine. Where the
caveator alleges undue influence, fraud and coercion, the onus is on him to prove the
same. Even where there are no such pleas but the circumstances give rise to doubts, it
is for the propounder to satisfy the conscience of the court. The suspicious
circumstances may be as to the genuineness of the signature of the testator, the
condition of the testator's mind, the dispositions made in the Will being unnatural,
improbable or unfair in the light of relevant circumstances or there might be other
indications in the Will to show that the testator's mind was not free. In such a case
the court would naturally expect that all legitimate suspicion should be completely
removed before the document is accepted as the last Will of the testator. If the
propounder himself takes part in the execution of the Will which confers a
substantial benefit on him, that is also a circumstance to be taken into account, and
the propounder is required to remove the doubts by clear and satisfactory evidence. If
the propounder succeeds in removing the suspicious circumstances the court would
grant probate, even if the Will might be unnatural and might cut off wholly or in part
near relations."
16. A Will is executed to alter the ordinary mode of succession and by the very nature
of things it is bound to result in earlier reducing or depriving the share of natural
heirs. If a person intends his property to pass to his natural heirs, there is no
necessity at all of executing a Will. It is true that a propounder of the Will has to
remove all suspicious circumstances. Suspicion means doubt, conjecture or mistrust.
But the fact that natural heirs have either been excluded or a lesser share has been
given to them, by itself without anything more, cannot be held to be a suspicious
circumstance specially in a case where the bequest has been made in favour of an
offspring. As held in P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar and
Ors.: [1995] 2 SCR 585, it is the duty of the propunder of the Will to remove all the
suspected features, but there must be real, germane and valid suspicious features and
not fantasy of the doubting mind. It has been held that if the propounder succeeds in
removing the suspicious circumstances, the court has to give effect to the Will, even if
the Will might be unnatural in the sense that it has cut off wholly or in part near
relations. ….. In Rabindra Nath Mukherjee and Anr. v . Panchanan Banerjee (dead)
by LRs. and Ors.: AIR 1995 SC 1684, it was observed that the circumstance of
deprivation of natural heirs should not raise any suspicion because the whole idea
behind execution of the Will is to interfere with the normal line of succession and so,
natural heirs would be debarred in every case of Will. Of course, it may be that in
some cases they are fully debarred and in some cases partly.” 24.6. In the case of
Mahesh Kumar (supra), this Court indicated the error of approach on the part of the
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
34

High Court while appreciating the evidence relating to the Will as follows:-
“44. The issue which remains to be examined is whether the High Court was justified
in coming to the conclusion that the execution of the will dated 10-2-1992 was
shrouded with suspicion and the appellant failed to dispel the suspicion? At the
outset, we deem it necessary to observe that the learned Single Judge misread the
statement of Sobhag Chand (DW3) and recorded something which does not appear in
his statement. While Sobhag Chand categorically stated that he had signed as the
witness after Shri Harishankar had signed the will, the portion of his statement
extracted in the impugned judgment gives an impression that the witnesses had
signed even before the executant had signed the will.
45. Another patent error committed by the learned Single Judge is that he decided
the issue relating to validity of the will by assuming that both the attesting witnesses
were required to append their signatures simultaneously. Section 63(c) of the 1925
Act does not contain any such requirement and it is settled law that examination of
one of the attesting witnesses is sufficient. Not only this, while recording an adverse
finding on this issue, the learned Single Judge omitted to consider the categorical
statements made by DW 3 and DW 4 that the testator had read out and signed the
will in their presence and thereafter they had appended their signatures.
46. The other reasons enumerated by the learned Single Judge for holding that the
execution of will was highly suspicious are based on mere surmises/conjectures. The
observation of the learned Single Judge that the possibility of obtaining signatures of
Shri Harishankar and attesting witnesses on blank paper and preparation of the draft
by Shri S.K. Agarwal, Advocate on pre-signed papers does not find even a semblance
of support from the pleadings and evidence of the parties. If Respondent 1 wanted to
show that the will was drafted by the advocate after Shri Harishankar and attesting
witnesses had signed blank papers, he could have examined or at least summoned
Shri S.K. Agarwal, Advocate, who had represented him before the Board of Revenue.
…..” 24.7. Another decision cited on behalf of the appellant in the case of Leela
Rajagopal may also be referred where this Court summarised the principles that
ultimately, the judicial verdict in relation to a Will and suspicious circumstances shall
be on the basis of holistic view of the matter with consideration of all the unusual
features and suspicious circumstances put together and not on the impact of any
single feature. This Court said,-
“13. A will may have certain features and may have been executed in certain circumstances which
may appear to be somewhat unnatural. Such unusual features appearing in a will or the unnatural
circumstances surrounding its execution will definitely justify a close scrutiny before the same can
be accepted. It is the overall assessment of the court on the basis of such scrutiny; the cumulative
effect of the unusual features and circumstances which would weigh with the court in the
determination required to be made by it. The judicial verdict, in the last resort, will be on the basis
of a consideration of all the unusual features and suspicious circumstances put together and not on
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
35

the impact of any single feature that may be found in a will or a singular circumstance that may
appear from the process leading to its execution or registration. This, is the essence of the repeated
pronouncements made by this Court on the subject including the decisions referred to and relied
upon before us.” 24.8. We need not multiply the references to all and other decisions cited at the
Bar, which essentially proceed on the aforesaid principles while applying the same in the given set of
facts and circumstances. Suffice would be to point out that in a recent decision in Civil Appeal No.
6076 of 2009: Shivakumar & Ors. v. Sharanabasppa & Ors., decided on 24.04.2020, this Court, after
traversing through the relevant decisions, has summarised the principles governing the adjudicatory
process concerning proof of a Will as follows:– “1. Ordinarily, a Will has to be proved like any other
document; the test to be applied being the usual test of the satisfaction of the prudent mind. Alike
the principles governing the proof of other documents, in the case of Will too, the proof with
mathematical accuracy is not to be insisted upon.
2. Since as per Section 63 of the Succession Act, a Will is required to be attested, it cannot be used as
evidence until at least one attesting witness has been called for the purpose of proving its execution,
if there be an attesting witness alive and capable of giving evidence.
3. The unique feature of a Will is that it speaks from the death of the testator and, therefore, the
maker thereof is not available for deposing about the circumstances in which the same was
executed. This introduces an element of solemnity in the decision of the question as to whether the
document propounded is the last Will of the testator. The initial onus, naturally, lies on the
propounder but the same can be taken to have been primarily discharged on proof of the essential
facts which go into the making of a Will.
4. The case in which the execution of the Will is surrounded by suspicious circumstances stands on a
different footing. The presence of suspicious circumstances makes the onus heavier on the
propounder and, therefore, in cases where the circumstances attendant upon the execution of the
document give rise to suspicion, the propounder must remove all legitimate suspicions before the
document can be accepted as the last Will of the testator.
5. If a person challenging the Will alleges fabrication or alleges fraud, undue influence, coercion et
cetera in regard to the execution of the Will, such pleas have to be proved by him, but even in the
absence of such pleas, the very circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will may give rise to
the doubt or as to whether the Will had indeed been executed by the testator and/or as to whether
the testator was acting of his own free will. In such eventuality, it is again a part of the initial onus of
the propounder to remove all reasonable doubts in the matter.
6. A circumstance is “suspicious” when it is not normal or is ‘not normally expected in a normal
situation or is not expected of a normal person’. As put by this Court, the suspicious features must
be ‘real, germane and valid’ and not merely the ‘fantasy of the doubting mind.’
7. As to whether any particular feature or a set of features qualify as “suspicious” would depend on
the facts and circumstances of each case. A shaky or doubtful signature; a feeble or uncertain mind
of the testator; an unfair disposition of property; an unjust exclusion of the legal heirs and
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
36

particularly the dependants; an active or leading part in making of the Will by the beneficiary
thereunder et cetera are some of the circumstances which may give rise to suspicion. The
circumstances above-noted are only illustrative and by no means exhaustive because there could be
any circumstance or set of circumstances which may give rise to legitimate suspicion about the
execution of the Will. On the other hand, any of the circumstance qualifying as being suspicious
could be legitimately explained by the propounder. However, such suspicion or suspicions cannot be
removed by mere proof of sound and disposing state of mind of the testator and his signature
coupled with the proof of attestation.
8. The test of satisfaction of the judicial conscience comes into operation when a document
propounded as the Will of the testator is surrounded by suspicious circumstance/s. While applying
such test, the Court would address itself to the solemn questions as to whether the testator had
signed the Will while being aware of its contents and after understanding the nature and effect of
the dispositions in the Will?
9. In the ultimate analysis, where the execution of a Will is shrouded in suspicion, it is a matter
essentially of the judicial conscience of the Court and the party which sets up the Will has to offer
cogent and convincing explanation of the suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will.”
CONTEST OF THE MATTER BY RESPONDENT NO.1
25. Having taken note of the principles which shall be the guiding factor in dealing with the main
questions posed in this matter, we may examine the rival contentions. Before entering into the
contentions relating to the suspicious circumstances concerning the Will in question, it would be
appropriate to deal with and dispose of a preliminary objection of the learned counsel for the
appellant as regards contest of the matter by respondent No.1. As noticed, it has been submitted
with reference to Section 268 of the Succession Act, Order VIII Rule 10, Order XIV Rule 1(6) and
Order XV Rule 2 CPC and the case of Bachhaj Nahar (supra) that the status of respondent No.1
remains that of a defendant who has not filed the written statement and who is not at issue; and
hence, the contentions urged on her behalf need no consideration and the evidence led by her
remains inadmissible. The submissions have been countered with reference to the principles in H.
Venkatachala Iyengar and Rani Purnima Debi (supra) as also with reference to Order VIII Rule 5(2),
Order VIII Rule 10 CPC and the decision in Balraj Taneja (supra). It is submitted that ultimately, the
Probate Court is a Court of conscience and the respondent No.1, being the elder daughter of the
testatrix, has every right to make submissions concerning the Will in question. In our view, the
submission made on behalf of the appellant seeking exclusion of respondent No.1 remains totally
baseless and could only be rejected.
25.1. The objection on behalf of the appellant does not stand in conformity with the law declared in
H. Venkatachala Iyengar and Rani Purnima Debi (supra) and scores of other decisions where this
Court has consistently held that the probate proceeding is ultimately a matter of conscience of the
Court; and irrespective of whether any plea in opposition is taken or not, a propounder of Will is
required to satisfy the conscience of the Court with removal of all the suspicious circumstances. By
the very nature and consequence of this proceeding, filing or non-filing of written statement or
objections by any party pales into insignificance and is of no effect. The probate proceeding is not
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
37

merely inter-partes proceeding but leads to judgment in rem and, therefore, even when no one
contests, it does not ipso facto lead to grant of probate. The probate is granted only on proof of Will
as also on removal of suspicious circumstances, if there be any, to the final satisfaction of the
conscience of the Court.
25.2. In view of the above, reference to the provisions of Order VIII Rule 10, Order XIV Rule 1(6)
and Order XV Rule 2 7 remains inapposite in relation to the proceeding before a Probate Court. We
may hasten to observe that even in a regular civil suit, merely for want of written statement by a
defendant, it is not necessary that a judgment would always follow in favour of the plaintiff without
proof of the basic facts and without making out a clear case of right to relief. Similarly, the decision
in the case of Bachhaj Nahar (supra) that relief cannot be granted in any Court without requisite
pleadings has hardly any application to the question at hand. 7 The referred provisions of CPC read
as under:-
Order VIII Rule 10:
“10.Procedure when party fails to present written statement called for by
Court.-Where any party from whom a written statement is required under rule 1 or
rule 9 fails to present the same within the time permitted or fixed by the Court, as the
case may be, the Court shall pronounce judgment against him, or make such order in
relation to the suit as it thinks fit and on the pronouncement of such judgment a
decree shall be drawn up.” Order XIV Rule 1(6):
“1. Framing of issues.-
*** *** *** (6) Nothing in this rule requires the Court to frame and record issues
where the defendant at the first hearing of the suit makes no defence.” Order XV Rule
2(1):
“2. One of several defendants not at issue.- (1) Where there are more defendants than
one, and any one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of
law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgment for or against such
defendants and the suit shall proceed only against the other defendants.
*** *** ***” 25.3. In the case of Balraj Taneja (supra), this Court examined the
provisions contained in sub-rule (2) of Rule 5 of Order XVIII of CPC 8 and said that,-
“11. Sub-rule (2) provides that if the defendant has not filed his written statement, it would be lawful
for the court to pronounce judgment on the basis of the facts contained in the plaint. The rule
further proceeds to say that notwithstanding that the facts stated in the plaint are treated as
admitted, the court, though it can lawfully pass the judgment, may before passing the judgment
require such fact to be proved….” Apart from the above, even as regards Rule 10 of Order XVIII, this
Court said,-
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
38

“27. In view of the above, it is clear that the court, at no stage, can act blindly or mechanically. While
enabling the court to pronounce judgment in a situation where no written statement is filed by the
defendant, the court has also been given the discretion to pass such order as it may think fit as an
alternative. This is also the position under Order 8 Rule 10 CPC where the court can either
pronounce judgment against the defendant or pass such order as it may think fit.” 25.4. We need not
multiply the authorities and discussion in this regard. Suffice it to say that even in a regular civil
suit, mere non-filing of written statement by the defendant does not always lead to a judgment in
favour of the plaintiff. Noteworthy it is that regular civil suit usually leads to a judgment inter-partes
and not in rem. Even then, the requirement of proof is not obviated. When the proceeding is solemn
in nature like that for 8 The referred provisions of CPC read as under:
Order VIII Rule 5(2) “5. Specific denial.-
*** *** *** (2) Where the defendant has not filed a pleading, it shall be lawful for the
Court to pronounce judgment on the basis of the facts contained in the plaint, except
as against a person under a disability, but the Court may, in its discretion, require any
such fact to be proved.
*** *** ***” probate, which leads to judgment in rem, it is beyond the cavil that mere
non-filing of caveat or opposition is not decisive of the matter. The propounder, in
every matter for grant of probate, irrespective of opposition or even admission by any
party, is required to satisfy the conscience of the Court, with removal of suspicious
circumstances, if any.
25.5. Apart from the aforementioned general principles, it is also significant to notice in the present
case that the respondent No.1 is none other but the elder widowed daughter of testatrix regarding
whom, some semblance of right, via the construction to be carried out by the appellant, is proposed
in the Will in question. Looking to her status as elder widowed daughter of the testatrix and looking
to the stipulation in the Will in question, it is evident that even without filing any written statement,
the respondent No.1 is entitled to show that the purported grant of some right to her is illusory or is,
in fact, no grant at all; and that her mother would not have put her in such an insecure position as
would be the result of the Will. As a necessary corollary, her right to demonstrate the suspicious
circumstances is inherent in the very process envisaged for the Probate Court. This is apart from the
fact that the respondent No.1 has indeed examined herself as a witness without objection by the
appellant.
25.6. Thus, the objection against contest by the respondent No.1, as raised on behalf of the
appellant, deserves to be, and is hereby rejected. SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES CONCERNING
THE WILL IN QUESTION
26. While examining the relevant factual aspects and circumstances of this case on the anvil of the
principles aforesaid, we may usefully observe that in the case of Leela Rajagopal (supra), this Court
found justified the concurrent findings on due execution of Will and, in the context of facts,
participation of the beneficiary in execution of the Will and his acquaintance with one of the
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
39

attesting witness were found to be reasonably explained. However, significantly, in the said case,
this Court also cautioned against repeated reappreciation of evidence, particularly in the appeal
lodged only by way of special leave, in the following words:-
“17. Before parting we would like to observe that the very fact that an appeal to this
Court can be lodged only upon grant of special leave to appeal would indicate the
highly circumscribed nature of the jurisdiction of this Court. In contrast to a statutory
appeal, an appeal lodged upon grant of special leave pursuant to a provision of the
Constitution would call for highly economic exercise of the power which though wide
to strike at injustice wherever it occurs must display highly judicious application
thereof. Determination of facts made by the High Court sitting as a first appellate
court or even while concurring as a second appellate court would not be reopened
unless the same gives rise to questions of law that require a serious debate or
discloses wholly unacceptable conclusions of fact which plainly demonstrate a
travesty of justice. Appreciation or reappreciation of evidence must come to a halt at
some stage of the judicial proceedings and cannot percolate to the constitutional
court exercising jurisdiction under Article 136.” (emphasis supplied) 26.1. In the
present case too, the Trial Court has returned the findings against the appellant after
due appreciation of evidence and the High Court has affirmed such findings after
independent and thorough examination of evidence. There appears hardly any scope
for disturbing such concurrent findings by entering into the process of reappreciation
of entire evidence yet, in view of the submissions made and in the interest of justice,
we have gone through the material on record to find if there be any such perversity
which might result in serious miscarriage of justice. We find none.
27. As noticed, there has not been any question on the testamentary capacity and
soundness of mind of the testatrix; and her handwriting as also signatures on the Will
in question are also beyond controversy.
However, the Trial Court and the High Court have concurrently found some such suspicious
circumstances which are of material bearing and which have remained unexplained. Put in a
nutshell, the unexplained suspicious circumstances so found are: (a) that appellant, the major
beneficiary, played an active role in execution of the Will in question and attempted to conceal this
fact before the Court; (b) that there had not been any plausible reason for non-inclusion of the only
son and other daughter of the testatrix in the process of execution of the Will and for excluding them
from the major part of the estate in question; (c) that there was no clarity about the construction
supposed to be carried out by the appellant; (d) that the manner of writing and execution of the Will
with technical and legal words was highly doubtful; and (e) that the attesting witnesses were
unreliable and there were contradictions in the statements of the witnesses. Because of these major
circumstances coupled with various supplemental factors, the Trial Court and the High Court felt
dissatisfied on the root question as to whether the testatrix duly executed the Will in question after
understanding its contents.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
40

28. There is no doubt that any of the factors taken into account by the Trial Court and the High
Court, by itself and standing alone, cannot operate against the validity of the propounded Will. That
is to say that, the Will in question cannot be viewed with suspicion only because the appellant had
played an active role in execution thereof though she is the major beneficiary; or only because the
respondents were not included in the process of execution of the Will; or only because of unequal
distribution of assets; or only because there is want of clarity about the construction to be carried
out by the appellant; or only because one of the attesting witnesses being acquaintance of the
appellant; or only because there is no evidence as to who drafted the printed part of the Will and the
note for writing the opening and concluding passages by the testatrix in her own hand; or only
because there is some discrepancy in the oral evidence led by the appellant; or only because of any
other factor taken into account by the Courts or relied upon by the respondents. The relevant
consideration would be about the quality and nature of each of these factors and then, the
cumulative effect and impact of all of them upon making of the Will with free agency of the testatrix.
In other words, an individual factor may not be decisive but, if after taking all the factors together,
conscience of the Court is not satisfied that the Will in question truly represents the last wish and
propositions of the testator, the Will cannot get the approval of the Court; and, other way round, if
on a holistic view of the matter, the Court feels satisfied that the document propounded as Will
indeed signifies the last free wish and desire of the testator and is duly executed in accordance with
law, the Will shall not be disapproved merely for one doubtful circumstance here or another factor
there.
29. Keeping the applicable principles in view, we may examine the factors and circumstances which
are suspicious in character and their overall impact on the document in question.
29.1. While entering into the facts and circumstances related with the Will, profitable it would be to
recapitulate the background and the set up in which the contested Will is said to have been
executed. The immovable property in question at No. D-179, Defence Colony, New Delhi was
originally of the ownership of father of the contesting parties, husband of testatrix. The ground floor
of this property was given in gift to the appellant on 25.01.2001, whereas the first floor and the other
portion/s came to the testatrix by way of the Will of her husband dated 14.02.2001. The husband of
testatrix expired on 20.10.2002. The appellant, married daughter of the testatrix, was admittedly
living in a different locality, that is, at Panchshila Park for 20-22 years, whereas son of the testatrix,
who was serving in Army, remained posted outside and was lastly residing in Shimla. The testatrix
was a cancer patient and was under regular treatment in an Army Hospital at Delhi. Significantly,
the testatrix was residing at the said ground floor portion of the building in question (which had
already become property of the appellant by virtue of the gift by her father). The respondent No.1,
the widowed daughter of the testatrix, was residing at the first floor of the same building with her
own daughter. Admittedly, the said first floor of the house was the property of testatrix by virtue of
the Will of her husband. It is not a matter of much dispute that respondent No.1, while living in the
same building, was taking care of the testatrix and was even taking her to Army Hospital for
treatment.
29.2. In the given set-up, a basic question immediately crops up as to what could be the reason for
the testatrix being desirous of providing unequal distribution of her assets by giving major share to
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
41

the appellant in preference to her other two children. The appellant has suggested that the parents
had special affection towards her. Even if this suggestion is taken on its face value, it is difficult to
assume that the alleged special affection towards one child should necessarily correspond to
repugnance towards the other children by the same mother. Even if the parents had special liking
and affection towards the appellant, as could be argued with reference to the gift made by the father
in her favour of the ground floor of the property in question, it would be too far stretched and
unnatural to assume that by the reason of such special affection towards appellant, the mother
drifted far away from the other children, including the widowed daughter who was residing on the
upper floor of the same house and who was taking her care. In the ordinary and natural course, a
person could be expected to be more inclined towards the child taking his/her care; and it would be
too unrealistic to assume that special love and affection towards one, maybe blue-eyed, child would
also result in a person leaving the serving and needy child in lurch. As noticed, an unfair disposition
of property or an unjust exclusion of the legal heirs, particularly the dependants, is regarded as a
suspicious circumstance. The appellant has failed to assign even a wee bit reason for which the
testatrix would have thought it proper to leave her widowed daughter in the heap of uncertainty as
emanating from the Will in question. Equally, the suggestion about want of thickness of relations
between the testatrix and her son (respondent No.2) is not supported by the evidence on record. The
facts about the testatrix sending good wishes on birthday to her son and joining family functions
with him, even if not establishing a very great bond between the mother and her son, they at least
belie the suggestion about any strain in their relations. Be that as it may, even if the matter relating
to the son of testatrix is not expanded further, it remains inexplicable as to why the testatrix would
not have been interested in making adequate and concrete provision for the purpose of her widowed
daughter (respondent No.1).
29.3. The aforesaid factor of unexplained unequal distribution of the property is confounded by two
major factors related with making of the Will in question: one, the active role played by the
appellant in the process; and second, the virtual exclusion of the other children of testatrix in the
process. As noticed, an active or leading part in making of the Will by the beneficiary thereunder has
always been regarded as a circumstance giving rise to suspicion but, like any other circumstance, it
could well be explained by the propounder and/or beneficiary. In the present case, it is not in
dispute that out of the three children of testatrix, the appellant alone was present at the time of
execution of the Will in question on 20.05.2003. As noticed, at the relevant point of time, the
appellant was admittedly living away and in a different locality for about 20-22 years, whereas
testatrix was residing at the ground floor of the building and the respondent No.1 was at the first
floor. Even if we leave aside the case of the respondent No.2 who was living in Shimla, there was no
reason that in the normal and ordinary course, the testatrix would not have included the respondent
No.1 in execution of the Will in question, particularly when she was purportedly making adequate
arrangements towards the welfare of respondent No.1. In other words, if the Will in question was
being made without causing any prejudice to the respondent No.1, there was no reason to keep her
away from this process. Admittedly, the Will in question was not divulged for about three years.
Therefore, the added feature surrounding the execution of the Will had been of unexplained
exclusion of the respondent No.1 from the process. 29.4. Apart from the above, active participation
of the appellant in making of the Will in question cannot be left aside as one of the minor factors for
the reason that the appellant indeed attempted to project a face of innocence by suggesting that the
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
42

testatrix did not discuss the Will with her; that she was not aware as to who drafted the Will and
where was it typed; and that she came to know about the Will only on 20/21.05.2003. The appellant
even stated that she did not call the witnesses and that the testatrix herself might have called them.
The witness PW-2 has clearly contradicted the appellant by deposing that on 18.05.2003, it was the
appellant who invited him to her mother’s place. Thus, the appellant, by her conduct of attempting
to avoid the fact that she was aware of making of Will, at least two days before its execution, has only
strengthened the suspicion arising because of her active participation in execution of the Will while
keeping the other children of the testatrix excluded from the process. 29.5. Yet further, when we
look at the Will in question itself and examine the evidence adduced in regard to its execution, a few
more factors of suspicion emerge on the face of the record.
29.5.1. In regard to the contents and frame of the document in question, learned counsel for the
appellant has submitted that greater degree of presumption that arises in the case of a “holograph”
Will, as enunciated in the case of Joyce Primrose Prestor (supra), is applicable to the present case
too, where the significant contents relating to the particulars of the person and bequeath, in the
opening and concluding passages, are duly written in her own hand by the testatrix. The
submissions so made on behalf of the appellant carry their own shortcomings and demerits for the
reason that the Will in question does not directly answer to the description of a “holograph” Will
because, except for the opening and concluding passages, the entire Will is in electronic print. The
core of bequeathing part is also in print and not in handwriting. In the case of Joyce Primrose
Prestor, the entire Will was handwritten, which is not the case here. Coupled with this remains the
admitted fact that even the handwritten portions are not of the diction of the testatrix herself. She
had only copied them from a note available with her; and it is apparent from the document that such
handwritten portions are jotted down on the base lines drawn on the paper.
29.5.2. Thus, practically, it was a case of the testatrix merely copying, on the dotted lines, the text
already given to her. The sanctity attached to a bequeath in the handwriting of the testator
presupposes a co-ordinated work of a free hand and a free mind, that is, the hand writes what comes
out of and given by the mind. In the present case, it is difficult to be satisfied that what is found
written in hand by the testatrix had been dictated by her own mind so as to make it an expression of
her own free will. 29.5.3. Moreover, the handwritten portions carry such formal and legal
expressions like “testament” and “set and subscribed my hand”, which are the tools of the language
employed by a person who is conversant with legal format and requirements for execution of such a
document; and, ordinarily, a layperson like the testatrix is not expected to be conversant with them.
The printed portion also carries the expressions like “codicil”, “give, devise and bequeath”, which are
not the expressions of a layperson. In the given circumstances, the want of evidence as to who
drafted the printed portion and the said note (for copying on the dotted lines) becomes an added
factor towards suspicion as to whether the contents of the document in question are, in fact,
expressive of the actual desire of the testatrix towards succession of her property.
29.5.4. This set of suspicious circumstances concerning the process of execution of the document in
question reaches to impenetrable finale by another major part of contradictions in oral evidence.
The appellant asserted in her testimony that the testatrix discussed the contents of the Will with the
attesting witnesses but both of them (PW-2 and PW-3) consistently maintained that the contents
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
43

were not discussed with them. Thus, the appellant has failed to clear the doubts as to whether what
is found written in the document in question (both by hand and in print) carry and convey the last
wish of the testatrix.
30. Going yet further, when the core contents of the document in question are examined, what we
find is another load of several unclear doubts and variety of uncertainties. We would hasten to
observe that as per Section 81 of the Succession Act, if there is an ambiguity or deficiency on the face
of a Will, no extrinsic evidence as to the intentions of the testator shall be admitted. Thus,
everything related with the true intention of testatrix in the present case is to be gathered from the
contents of the Will in question itself.
30.1. As per the stipulation in Clause 1 of the bequeathing contents, the first floor, terrace and all
other properties except the ground floor are given to the appellant with directions that she would
carry out either of the two options as deemed proper, namely, either to construct on the terrace of
the building such residential facility as may be permissible under the Municipal Building Bye-laws
at the time of demise of the testatrix and to hand over possession of the construction to respondent
No.1 while retaining terrace rights thereon; or in the alternative, to demolish the entire building and
carry out such construction as may be permissible under the Municipal Building Bye-laws and
become exclusive owner thereof, save and except that the highest floor of such building shall go to
the respondent No.1, while again, the terrace rights shall remain with the appellant. At the first
blush, it may appear as if by these stipulations, the testatrix was duly taking care of the interests of
respondent No.1. However, a closer look gives rise to manifold questions which carry no plausible
answer.
30.2. In the said stipulations, neither any time frame is provided for the appellant to carry out the
expected construction nor the nature, quality and extent of such construction has been spelt out. It
is also not clear as to what would happen in the event of the appellant not carrying out such
construction, that is, as to whether she would stand divested of the property already bequeathed?
30.3. Apart from all the aforesaid aspects, the fundamental fact remains that none of the
stipulations could have been legally made by the testatrix, nor they could be enforced in any
proceedings. This is for the reason that nowhere in the document any provision has been made for
carrying out such construction out of the estate of the testatrix. It remains questionable if the
testatrix was entitled to issue such directions in the testament, which could have been executed only
through the property of the legatee and not from her own estate?
30.4. Yet further, the stipulation in the alternative in sub-clause (b) of Clause 1 of the Will remains
non-est on the face of the record. Admittedly, the ground floor of the building in question is the
property of the appellant for having been gifted by her father. The direction for demolition of the
entire building as contained in the said sub-clause (b) includes in it the direction to demolish the
ground floor too. The testatrix could not have given any such direction because that amounts to
intrusion into the property rights of the appellant in such a manner so as to direct her to pull down
her own property and lose value thereof and then, to invest further by raising a new construction.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
44

30.5. Moreover, whether as per sub-clause (a) or as per sub-clause (b), if at all the appellant were to
make any such construction as expected, it would become her own property; and the question would
yet remain as to how the respondent No. 1 shall enforce conveyance of the appellant’s title to
herself?
30.6. It remains trite that no one can convey a better title than what he had; as expressed in the
maxim: ‘Nemo dat quod non habet’9. The testatrix never had any right over the property belonging
to the appellant and could not have conveyed to the respondent No.1 any property which was of the
ownership of the appellant or which might be acquired or raised by the appellant in future by her
own funds. On this ground alone, the Will in question is required to be considered void as per
Section 89 of the 9 See, for example, Narinder Singh Rao v. Air Vice-Marshal Mahinder Singh Rao &
Ors.:
(2013) 9 SCC 425, where the testatrix had bequeathed property in excess to her share
and this Court held that the bequest has to be treated only to the extent of the share
held by the testatrix.
Succession Act, when the principal bequeathing stipulation in the Will suffers from uncertainty to
the hilt.
30.7. A close look at the Will in question brings forth yet another interesting, nay disturbing, feature
of its contents. Whilst in the first alternative in sub-clause (a) of Clause 1 of the bequeathing part of
the Will, the testatrix expected that the appellant shall construct “residential facility of such covered
area as is permissible under the Municipal Building Bye-laws at the time of my demise”, whereas, in
sub-clause (b) thereof, the testatrix provided the alternative that the appellant shall carry out new
construction “as is permissible under the Municipal Building Bye-laws”. The expression “at the time
of my demise”, as occurring in sub-clause (a) does not occur in sub-clause (b). Now, it remains
elementary that if a construction is to be raised, it has to conform to the Building Bye-laws or
Regulations as in force and as applicable at the relevant time of construction. The testatrix could not
have overridden the operation of law by providing that the construction could be raised as
permissible under the Bye-laws at the time of her demise. If that was not the meaning of sub-clause
(a), then it remains questionable as to why the expression “at the time of my demise” at all occurred
there and the question further remains as to why the same was omitted in sub-clause (b)?
30.8. Therefore, literal reading of the Will in question makes it clear that the purported provision for
the respondent No.1 is illusory and an eye wash because on the practical side, the provision is
inexecutable and unenforceable; and the respondent No.1 is not likely to get anything thereunder.
31. In the ultimate analysis, we are satisfied that the Will in question is surrounded by various
suspicious circumstances which are material in nature and which have gone unexplained. The
cumulative effect of these suspicious circumstances is that it cannot be said that the testatrix was
aware of and understood the meaning, purport and effect of the contents of the Will in question. The
appellant, while seeking probate, has not only failed to remove and clear the aforesaid suspicious
circumstances but has even contributed her own part in lending more weight to each and every
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
45

suspicious circumstance. The Will in question cannot be probated from any standpoint.
The curious case of alleged third page of the Will
32. For what has been discussed hereinabove, it is but evident that the Will in question is besieged
by multiple suspicious circumstances, which have not been cleared; rather every suspicious
circumstance is more baffling than the other. Even this is not the end of the matter.
33. There remains yet another, and perhaps the most confounding part of the matter, which leaves
nothing to doubt that the prayer for probate of the Will in question could only be declined. It is the
curious case of alleged third page of the Will in question and the vacillating stand of the appellant in
that regard. This aspect, perforce, needs a little elaboration as infra. 33.1. As noticed in the
preceding paragraph 13 and its sub-paragraphs, during the course of trial, on 24.03.2008, the
respondent No. 1 moved an application under Section 151 CPC seeking opportunity to further cross-
examine the appellant. In this application, the respondent No. 1, inter alia, attempted to raise a plea
relating to the alleged third page of the Will in question. This application was rejected by the Trial
Court on 25.03.2008, inter alia, with the observations that the story of this third page, as coming on
record for the first time cannot be believed, particularly when nothing in that regard was asked in
the cross-examination of PW-1. 33.1.1. Thereafter, the respondent No. 1 filed another application
seeking permission to file her written statement and seeking condonation of delay. Again, the
respondent No. 1 attempted to refer to the said third page of the Will, inter alia, with the following
submissions:-
“4. The Respondent No. 2 submits that due to her lack of knowledge about the
existence of the third-page of the purported Will and being all through assured by the
Petitioner that the Respondent No. 2 would get her share as per Will, the Respondent
No. 2 did not file objections at the initial stage.
5. The Respondent No. 2 submits that the purported Will in question was lying in the
custody of the Petitioner and she can only give proper clarification and explanation
about the handwritten portion thereon and with regard to the third-page of the said
Will, which the Petitioner did not produce before this Learned Court with some
ill-motive.” In reply to the aforesaid part of the application, the present appellant
stoutly denied the existence of any third page of the Will and, inter alia, submitted as
under:
“4.That para No. 4 of the application is wrong and hence denied. It is denied that
there is any third page of the Will, as alleged or otherwise. This Hon’ble Court has
already dealt with this false contention of the Respondent No. 2 vide its order dated
11.04.2008. Even the perusal of the Will clearly reveals that the Will is in two pages.
The averments to the contrary are absurd, frivolous and devoid of any merits. It may
be appreciated that the Respondent No. 2 admits that the Will, that is, the subject
matter of the present petition, but owing to her malafide intentions is now seeking to
take self contradictory stand, which is not permissible under law. It may be
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
46

appreciated that the Respondent No. 2 is an educated lady and the averments with
regard to lack of any knowledge etc., is wrong and hence denied. It is denied that the
Petitioner has given any such assurances, as alleged or otherwise.” The application so
filed on behalf of respondent No. 1 and another application filed on behalf of
respondent No. 2 under Order IX Rule 7 CPC were decided together by the Trial
Court in its order dated 03.07.2008, inter alia, with the observations that, ‘the
alleged 3rd page appears to be some another document and prima facie it is not
certainly 3rd page of the Will’.
33.1.2. Yet again, an application filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 under Order XI
Rule 12 and 14 CPC seeking production of the same alleged third page of the Will was
rejected by the Trial Court by its order dated 23.08.2008, inter alia, with the
observations that the respondent No. 2 had described the entire Will as forged and
fabricated so he ‘cannot be allowed to take a contradictory stand that the third page is
genuine and other two pages are forged’. The Trial Court also observed that the claim
of the appellant was only in respect of one immovable property and one bank account
and no claim had been made in respect of any movable property.
The Trial Court further went on to observe that ‘even if it is presumed that deceased during her life
time distributed her personal belongings, cash and jewellery in accordance with the third page then
also that third page has now become useless because the distribution of the movable assets took
place during life time of the deceased whereas the Will has to take effect after the death of the
testatrix.’ 33.2. Thus, in the Trial Court, at a late stage, the respondents attempted to suggest, rather
persist, with the submission that there had been a third page of the Will but this suggestion was
specifically denied by the appellant even with the allegation that the said third page had been
fabricated by the respondents. The Trial Court accepted the submission of the appellant to the
extent that no such third page existed. The Trial Court even observed that distribution of movable
assets of testatrix was complete during her lifetime and the only subject-matter remaining was the
immovable property and the bank account.
33.3. In continuity with what has been observed hereinabove, we may also add that prima facie, the
suggestion about any such third page of the Will made by the testatrix appears doubtful because the
Will is question is drawn up in two pages; the testatrix has specifically written in her own hand that
the Will is so made in two pages; and the document effectively ends at the bottom of the second page
with signatures of testatrix and two attesting witnesses.
33.3.1. However, all the observations and findings of Trial Court (as regards the alleged third page of
the Will in question) and even the prima facie impression given by the document Ex.PW1/H against
existence of any such third page of Will are shaken to the core when we take into account the strange
turnabout and volte-face of the appellant in the High Court, where it was asserted on her behalf that
she had indeed acted as per the “directions” of the testatrix in the said third page!
34. The above-noted strange shift in stand of the appellant, where she asserted having acted as per
the said third page had its own background. As noticed, during the course of trial, a fact surfaced
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
47

that before filing the petition for probate, the appellant had made payment of a sum of Rs. 25,000/-
to the daughter of the attesting witness PW-3; and the Trial Court even observed that the possibility
of this witness being bribed was not ruled out. This very aspect was seemingly pressed again before
the High Court by the respondents. While countering such contentions made on behalf of the
respondents as also while asserting that the respondent No. 1 was not fair in her conduct, the
appellant asserted before the High Court that though this third page was a creation of the
respondents but, she (the appellant) had acted according to the desire of the testatrix as stated in the
said third page. It was specifically stated on behalf of the appellant that payments were made by way
of four cheques, in the sum of Rs. 25,000/- apiece, in favour of the daughter of PW-3, the daughter
of the respondent No. 1 and two sons of her own (the appellant) ‘in compliance with the directions in
the said “3rd page”, which is a separate directive of the deceased de hors the Will’. It was further
asserted on behalf of the appellant that she had ‘faithfully acted upon the directions’ set out in the
said third page and handed over the car to the daughter of respondent No. 1 and even gave the
jewelleries to the respondent No. 1 herself! It was sought to be argued on behalf of the appellant that
the said third page rather proves the validity of the Will in question.
34.1. What has been noted hereinabove, being the entirely different stand of the appellant regarding
the said third page, is specifically found in the written arguments filed on her behalf in the High
Court. The relevant part of such written arguments may be usefully extracted as under:-
“1. That in the first place there is no challenge from either of the 2 Respondents to the
signatures and the hand writing of the Testatirix on the Will; indeed there is
sufficient admission of the validity of the Will in the following manner:
ADMISSIONS
(a) Respondent No. 2 files no objections to the Probate Petition.
(b) Respondent No.2, who had been granted the license to reside in the suit property,
clandestinely attempts its alienation, constraining the Petitioner to file a suit for
injunction (Annexure A-14 on page 176 --- please see page 181 for the prayer), as per
legal advice received as against an Application for restraint in the Probate Petition
itself.
Respondent No.2 retaliates by committing a volte face and filing an Application for permission to
further cross examine the Petitioner with regard to (i) the holograph portion of the Will, (ii) the
existence of a third page to the Will, (iii) doubting the fatherhood of the Petitioner and (iv)
establishing the extent of her rights in the suit property under the Will. The Application is dismissed
vide Order dated 25.03.2008 (Annexure A-7 on page 93) but the flip-flop stands of the Respondent
No.2 may be noted to deny any credence to her contradictory submissions in the instant Appeal and
the contention of the existence of a 3rd page to the Will tantamounting to the admission of the
validity of the 2 paged Will propounded by the Petitioner.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
48

The so called “3rd page” is Annexure A-8 on page 97, which does not form part of the Will but was
signed separately by the Testatrix and has indeed been acted upon to the benefit of, amongst others,
Respondent No.2 herself and her daughter.
It is not comprehensible as to how then the Respondent’s challenge the Petitioner’s issuance of the 4
Nos. cheques, all in the sums of Rs.25,000/- apiece favouring Gen. Ahluwalia’s daughter,
Respondent No.2’s daughter and the Petitioner’s 2 sons in compliance with the directions in the said
“3rd page”, which is a separate directive of the deceased de hors the Will.
Also in compliance with the said directives the Respondent No.2’s daughter has been given the car
belonging to the deceased by the Petitioner after the demise of the deceased.
**** **** ****
12. That at the hearing R-3 relies upon a litany of FALSEHOODS in order to advance her case
against the Will, as set out hereunder:
Sr.No. Submissions at the Manifest Falsehood Bar ****
(ii) The Petitioner has The averment is once given Rs.25,000/- to again false to the
the daughter of one knowledge of R-3 in as of the witnesses to much as it is he and
R-2 the Will in order to who have propounded a influence him. paper described as
“the 3rd page” of the Will in question wherein the Testatrix has directed the manner
of the distribution of her movable assets, though not in the form of a Will, but the
Petitioner has faithfully acted upon the directions set out therein (Annexure A-
8, page 97) and paid Rs.25,000/- not only to the daughter of the witness Mandira Ahluwalia but has
also paid a sum of Rs.25,000/- besides various jewelries and a car to R-2’s daughter Nomita Mehta
as also various jewelries to R-2 herself as per the directions contained in the said “3rd page” *** ***
***
13. That at the hearing, R-2, taking a leaf out of R-3’s book, relies upon a further litany of
FALSEHOODS in order to advance her case against the Will, as set out hereunder:
Sr.No. Submissions at the        Manifest Falsehood
       Bar
***
(iv)   The       Petitioner’s    The false allegation is
       distribution        of    bellied by the so-called
       moneys and other          “3rd page” of the Will
       movable assets left       propounded by R-2 & R-
       behind      by    the     3 and the Petitioner has
       Testatrix     arouses     made        the     various
       suspicion that she        payments                 and
       was either “buying        disbursed           various
       out”      Respondent      movables        after    the
       No.2 and one of the       demise of the Testatrix
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
49

       attesting witnesses       faithfully in terms of the
       or misappropriating       said page which was
       the     joint    bank     duly signed by the
       account held by the       Testatrix but did not
       Testatrix with the        form part of the “2
       Petitioner.               paged Will” or can be
                                 deemed to be a codicil
                                 but      the      Petitioner
                                 honoured the dictate of
                                 the Testatrix as set out
                                 on a piece of paper
                                 signed by her.
        ***     ***                      ***”
                                           (underlining supplied for emphasis)
34.2. In paragraph 49 of the impugned judgment, the High Court noticed such a stand of the
appellant, seeking to rely on the very same disputed third page of the Will and observed that this
third page was never produced by the appellant; rather when the respondent No. 2 sought its
production, the appellant denied the same. The High Court also observed that the said third page of
the Will was never proved before the Trial Court; and even if it was assumed to be existing, the
suspicious circumstances were not dispelled.
35. In our view, though the High Court has rightly observed that even if this third page is assumed to
be existing, it does not remove the suspicious circumstances but the High Court has stopped short of
going a little further and has not noticed that volte-face of the appellant regarding this third page
tilts the preponderance of probabilities heavily, rather conclusively, against her. Noteworthy it is
that the said third page has not been exhibited in evidence. The flip-flops of the appellant regarding
this third page compels us to examine several of the possibilities concerning other assets of the
testatrix.
35.1. As noticed, the Will in question (Ex.PW1/H) is drawn on two pages and is complete in itself
and does not leave any scope for any other codicil concerning the estate of the deceased, particularly
when bequeath has been made not only of the immovable property and the bank account but also as
regards the other assets of testatrix in the residuary clause, which reads as under: – “2. I also direct
that in the event of my acquiring any further movable or immovable assets hereinafter or any other
assets that I may have forgotten to mention in the present Will the same shall devolve upon my
daughter Mrs. Kavita Kanwar.” 35.1.1. Now, from the evidence on record and from the stand of the
appellant, there is little to doubt that there had been several other assets of the testatrix apart from
the said immovable property and the bank account. By virtue of the aforesaid residuary clause, all
such other assets are bequeathed to the appellant. In the given scenario, two serious questions
perforce acquire immediate attention. One that while making the application seeking probate, the
appellant did not divulge all other assets which were to come in her hands by virtue of the said
residuary clause of the Will in question10. Secondly, when there had not been any direction in the
two page Will in question for making payment to anyone or parting with any movable to anyone,
what had been the reason for the appellant making payment to different persons, including her own
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
50

sons, the daughter of the attesting witness and the daughter of the respondent No. 1 apart from
giving car to the daughter of the respondent No. 1 and jewelleries to the respondent No. 1 (as alleged
in the written submissions before the 10 In paragraph 8.2 hereinbefore, we have reproduced the
major contents of the application seeking probate with its Annexure-B wherein, only the said
immovable property and the amount lying in the bank account were stated; and in paragraph 12 of
the application, the appellant mentioned the immovable property as the only asset likely to come in
her hands with the referred stipulations.
High Court). Both these questions on the conduct of the appellant only thicken the suspicious
circumstances surrounding the Will in question. 35.2. On the other hand, as soon as the possibility
of existence of such third page carrying the desire and directions of the testatrix about distribution
of her other movable property is taken into account 11, the document Ex.PW1/H loses all its worth
because it cannot be said the testatrix executed the same after understanding the meaning and
purport of its contents. If she had the desire of distribution of movable property in a different
manner and to different persons (as alleged by the appellant before the High Court), the aforesaid
residuary clause would not have occurred in the Will in question at all. Secondly, if it is assumed
that the testatrix issued separate directions about distribution of her assets de hors the Will then,
the Will in question ceases to be her last Will.
36. Hence, to cap all the suspicious circumstances, the aforesaid equivocal stand of the appellant, as
regards the third page of the Will and her assertion of having acted in accordance with the
“directions” in the said third page of the Will, effectively knocks the entire case of the appellant
down to the bottom. The suspicions arising because of the facts and factors noticed hereinbefore,
including the unnatural exclusion of the respondents from estate; uncertain and rather inexecutable
stipulation about construction by the appellant for the purpose of the respondent No.1; active role
played by the appellant in execution of the Will and yet seeking to avoid 11 As per the submissions
made before the High Court, the appellant indeed carried out the directions contained in such third
page of the Will. the factum of her role by incomplete and vague statements; and the witnesses
having contradicted the appellant on material particulars etc., have not only gone unexplained but
are confounded beyond repair with such vacillating stand of the appellant regarding the said third
page of the Will of the testatrix.
Summation
37. The discussion foregoing is sufficient to find that thick clouds of suspicious circumstances are
hovering over the Will in question which have not been cleared; rather every suspicious
circumstance is confounded by another and the curious case of the alleged third page of the Will
effectively and completely demolishes the case of the appellant. Put differently, it is difficult to be
satisfied that what is literally coming out of the document in question had been the last wish and
desire of the testatrix as regards succession of her estate. On the contrary, we find enough and
cogent reasons to affirm the material findings of the Trial Court and the High Court that it cannot be
said that the testatrix executed and signed the document in question as her Will after having
understood the meaning, effect and purport of the contents.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
51

38. The result, inevitable, is that this appeal deserves to be dismissed. With the concurrent findings
having been affirmed and when the appellant is found wanting in forthrightness at various stages of
proceedings, costs ought to follow the result of dismissal of this appeal. Conclusion
39. Accordingly, and in view of the above, this appeal fails and is, therefore, dismissed with costs
quantified at Rs. 50,000/- (rupees fifty thousand), payable by the appellant equally to the
respondent No. 1 and respondent No. 2.
………………..………….J. (A.M.KHANWILKAR) …………..………….…….J. (DINESH MAHESHWARI)
New Delhi, Dated: 19th May, 2020.
Kavita Kanwar vs Mrs. Pamela Mehta on 19 May, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168564255/
52
