M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers
on 27 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5339, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
788
Author: L. Nageswara Rao
Bench: Ajay Rastogi, Hemant Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                             NON−REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
             CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 3413 OF 2020
         (Arising out of SLP(C) No(s). 18360 of 2019)
M/S. L&T HOUSING FINANCE LIMITED                ...APPELLANT(S)
                     VERSUS
M/S. TRISHUL DEVELOPERS AND ANR.             ...RESPONDENT(S)
                          JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1. The instant appeal is directed against the impugned judgment and order dated 27 th June, 2019
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Writ Petition No.22137
of 2019 wherein the High Court while reversing the finding returned by the Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal in its order dated 16 th April, 2019, upheld the order of the Debt Recovery Tribunal dated
23 rd March, 2018 quashing the demand notice dated 14th June, 2017 served on the respondents
(borrower) under Section 13(2) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the “SARFAESI Act”) followed
with the possession notices dated 09 th November, 2017 and 10th November, 2017.
2. Brief facts of the case are that the appellant is a Housing Finance Company under National
Housing Bank Act, 1987 and is notified as Financial Institution by the Department of Finance
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
1

(Central Government) in exercise of the powers conferred by sub− clause (iv) of clause (m) of sub−
section (1) of Section 2 of the SARFAESI Act. The appellant indeed falls within the definition of
“secured creditor” under the provisions of the SARFAESI Act and is entitled to initiate measures
under the provision of the SARFAESI Act for enforcement of security interest created on the secured
assets by the respondents (borrower/guarantor) in favour of the appellant (secured creditor).
3. Section 2(zd) of the SARFAESI Act which defines “secured creditor”, reads as follows: − “2.
Definitions. – (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, −− ….
(zd) “secured creditor" means−
(i) any bank or financial institution or any consortium or group of banks or financial institutions
holding any right, title or interest upon any tangible asset or intangible asset as specified in clause
(l);
(ii) debenture trustee appointed by any bank or financial institution; or
(iii) an asset reconstruction company whether acting as such or managing a trust set up by such
asset reconstruction company for the securitisation or reconstruction, as the case may be; or
(iv) debenture trustee registered with the Board appointed by any company for secured debt
securities; or
(v) any other trustee holding securities on behalf of a bank or financial institution, in whose favour
security interest is created by any borrower for due repayment of any financial assistance.
….”
4. The first respondent is a partnership firm registered under the Partnership Act, 1932 and is
dealing in the real estate construction business as alleged and the second respondent is the partner
of first respondent firm. The first respondent and its partners in carrying out its business obligations
approached the appellant for seeking financial assistance and submitted a request to the appellant
vide application dated 15 th May, 2015 for term loan of Rs.20 crores for completion of its project
(“Mittal Palms, Phase−I”).
5. The appellant taking note of the request made by the respondents sanctioned Term Loan Facility
to the tune of Rs. 20 crores towards completion of the project vide sanction letter dated 07th
August, 2015 on such terms and conditions as set out in the sanction letter and for availing the
above credit facility, the respondents executed Facility Agreement dated 11 th August, 2015 along
with security documents by mortgaging the various immovable properties as a security for creating
security interest in favour of the appellant. It may be relevant to note that the sanction letter dated
07th August, 2015 (P1) duly signed by the authorised signatory of “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” for
execution of the Facility Agreement and effecting all compliance as required to the satisfaction of the
lender was accepted and signed by the authorised signatory on behalf of the first respondent and
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
2

also by the guarantors clearly demonstrates that on the top of the letterhead towards right, the name
of the company is mentioned “L&T Finance (Home Loans)” and in the bottom towards left, it was
mentioned “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” with registered office at Mumbai and this is the letterhead
which has always been taken in use for correspondence at all later stages when the proceedings
against the respondents herein were initiated under Sections 13(2), 13(4) and 14 of the SARFAESI
Act.
6. It reveals from the record that the respondents at a later stage failed to maintain financial
discipline and subsequently became a defaulter and because of the alleged breach of the terms and
conditions of the Facility Agreement executed between the appellant (L&T Housing Finance Ltd.)
and the respondents (M/s. Trishul Developers through its Partners) towards completion of its
project, the appellant served a demand notice dated 16th December, 2016 to the respondents to pay
the outstanding dues within the stipulated period mentioned in the demand notice. Since the
respondents failed to make their outstanding payment, under the given circumstances the appellant
classified the account of the respondents as Non− performing Assets (NPA) on 15 th April, 2017 and
sent a notice of demand dated 14th June, 2017 under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act calling
upon the respondents to pay the outstanding dues i.e. Rs.16,97,54,851/− (Rupees Sixteen Crores
Ninety Seven Lakhs Fifty Four Thousand Eight Hundred and Fifty One Only) as on 31st May, 2017
in terms of the notice with future interest till actual payment within sixty days from the date of the
receipt of the demand notice.
7. Pursuant to the service of the notice of demand dated 14th June, 2017, the respondents did not
discharge their liability and sent their reply dated 08 th August, 2017 to the notice with full
consciousness knowing it well that the demand notice dated 14th June, 2017 has been served by the
appellant (secured creditor) in reference to the Facility Agreement dated 11 th August, 2015 which
has been executed between the parties i.e. the appellant and the respondents herein. It may be
relevant to note that the demand notice dated 14th June, 2017 under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI
Act was issued on the same letterhead of the appellant duly signed by its self same authorised
signatory, who had initially signed at the time when the proposal of term loan was sanctioned vide
sanction letter dated 07th August, 2015 and no objection was raised by the respondents in its reply
dated 08th August, 2017 of misconception or confusion if any, in reference to the secured creditor
(appellant) on whose behest the demand notice was served under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI
Act.
8. Since the respondents failed to discharge their liability towards the appellant in terms of the
demand notice, the appellant took further action in due compliance under Section 13(4) read with
Section 14 of the SARFAESI Act and filed application before the competent authority for taking
possession of the mortgaged properties and the collateral security of the respondents.
9. At this stage, the respondents proceeded in filing a Securitisation Application No.76/2018 before
the Debt Recovery Tribunal under Section 17 of the SARFAESI Act assailing the issuance of demand
notice under Sections 13(2) and 13(4) of the Act inter alia on various grounds. The learned Debt
Recovery Tribunal vide its order dated 23 rd March, 2018 set aside the demand notice on the
premise that it has not been validly issued in the name of the appellant (“L&T Housing Finance
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
3

Ltd.”) instead the name of the company has been mentioned as “L&T Finance Ltd.” and this defect
as alleged not being curable after issuance of demand notice by another group company instead of
secured creditor, held the proceedings not sustainable. The order of Debt Recovery Tribunal dated
23 rd March, 2018 came to be challenged by the appellant in appeal before the Debt Recovery
Appellate Tribunal(DRAT) and after the parties being heard, DRAT vide its order dated 16 th April,
2019 set aside the order of Debt Recovery Tribunal which came to be challenged by the respondents
in a writ petition before the High Court of Karnataka. The High Court while setting aside the order
of DRAT returned its finding in conformity with what was observed by the DRT in its order, which is
the subject matter of appeal before us.
10. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that from the initial stage until the demand notice
being served under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act or even the later correspondence was on the
same letterhead of the appellant from where the proceedings for the term loan was sanctioned in
favour of the respondents and further submits that the self−same authorised signatory, being there
of both the companies use common letterhead having its registered office and details of the sanction
letter and of Facility Agreement coupled with default committed by the respondents are in reference
to “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” and only at one stage, due to oversight, the appellant inadvertently
put the seal of “L&T Finance Ltd.” and it was not the case of the respondents that it has caused any
substantial prejudice, either in acknowledging that from whom (secured creditor) demand notice
under Section 13(2) has been served which can be further countenanced from the reply to the
demand notice filed by the respondents. In the given circumstances, the mere technical defect as
being noticed in the demand notice by the Tribunal and confirmed by the High Court in the
impugned judgment, will not negate the proceedings which has been initiated by the appellants
(secured creditor) in carrying out its obligations and protecting their security interest as
contemplated under the provisions of the SARFAESI Act.
11. Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the proceedings initiated under the
SARFAESI Act would not nullify on the mere technicality as being pointed out and the High Court
without appreciating the material on record has reversed the finding returned by the DRAT in its
extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 & 227 of the Constitution and if two views are possible,
unless found to be perverse it was not justified for the High Court to reverse the finding of fact
supported by the material on record and that needs interference of this Court.
12. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents while buttressing the judgment impugned of the
High Court submits that when the salient defect has been noticed by the DRT and confirmed by the
High Court at the very inception of the proceedings being initiated under the SARFAESI Act, all the
consequential proceedings initiated in furtherance thereof in the instant case cannot be said to be in
due compliance of the SARFAESI Act and once a procedure has been prescribed by law as mandated
under the SARFAESI Act, the secured creditor was under obligation to comply which indisputedly
has not been followed, in the given circumstances, no error has been committed by the High Court
under its impugned judgment and according to him, it needs no interference of this Court.
13. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance perused the material
available on record.
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
4

14. The indisputed fact which emerges from the record is that the respondents borrowed a term loan
from the appellant (L&T Housing Finance Ltd.) of Rs.20 crores vide sanction letter dated 07th
August, 2015 and later their account became NPA on 15th April, 2017 and prior thereto, the
appellant (secured creditor) served a notice on 16 th December, 2016 demanding its outstanding
dues sanctioned under the seal of their authorised officer on behalf of the lender, which has been
informed to this Court was a self− same authorised signatory of both the companies namely “L&T
Housing Finance Ltd.” and “L&T Finance Ltd”. Indisputedly, the notice under Section 13(2) of the
SARFAESI Act was served by the authorised signatory on behalf of the appellant on the letterhead
commonly used by “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” and “L&T Finance Ltd.” but inadvertently, the
authorised signatory put his signature under the seal of the company “L&T Finance Ltd”. In this
backdrop, from reply dated 08th August, 2017 of the respondents, it becomes clear that repayment
was demanded by the appellant(secured creditor) only and the respondents tried to justify and
assigned reasons for which the Facility Agreement dated 11th August, 2015 could not have been
carried out and only thereafter, the appellant (secured creditor) has initiated further proceedings
under Section 13(4) read with Section 14 of the Act.
15. Notably from the very inception at the stage, when the proposal of taking a term loan from the
appellant was furnished by the respondents vide their application dated 15 th May, 2015 and
accepted by the appellant vide sanction letter dated 07 th August, 2015 (P1), the letterhead which
was used for the purpose clearly indicates that on the top of the letterhead towards right, it reflects
“L&T Finance (Home Loans)” and on the bottom towards left, is of “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.”
with their registered office in Mumbai and this has been duly signed by the authorised signatory of
the borrower for M/s. Trishul Developers and by its guarantors.
16. It manifests from the record that the respondents from the initial stage are aware of the
procedure which is being followed by the appellant in its correspondence while dealing with its
customers and that is the same practice being followed by the appellant when demand notice dated
16 th December, 2016 was served at a later stage. The demand notice in explicit terms clearly
indicates the execution of the Facility Agreement dated 11th August, 2015 between the appellant
(L&T Housing Finance Ltd.) and the respondents (M/s. Trishul Developers through its partners)
and of the default being committed by the respondents (borrower/guarantor) in furtherance thereof,
a notice under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act was served on the same pattern of the letterhead
which is being ordinarily used by the appellant in its correspondence with its customers and the
demand notice dated 14 th June, 2017 without leaving any iota of doubt is in reference to the non−
fulfillment of the terms and conditions of the Facility Agreement dated 11 th August, 2015 executed
between the parties and even the schedule of security profile which has been annexed thereto is in
reference to the execution of Facility Agreement dated 11 th August, 2015 and its non−compliance of
the provisions of the SARFAESI Act.
17. Even in the reply to the demand notice which was served by the respondents through their
counsel dated 08th August, 2017 in compliance to Section 13(3A) of the SARFAESI Act, there was
no confusion left in reference to the correspondence taken place between the appellant (secured
creditor) and the respondents (borrower) tendering their justification and assigning reasons for
which compliance could not have been made and no objection was indeed raised by the respondents
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
5

in regard to the defect if any, in the demand notice dated 14th June, 2017 which was served by the
secured creditor i.e. “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” in compliance to the provisions of the SARFAESI
Act or in furtherance to the proceedings initiated at the behest of the appellant under Section 13(4)
read with Section 14 of the Act, for the first time, a feeble attempt was made in raising the alleged
technical objection in a Securitisation Application filed before the DRT and succeeded.
18. It may be relevant to note that the respondents (borrower) did not deny advancement of loan,
execution of Facility Agreement, their liability and compliance of the procedure being followed by
the secured creditor (appellant) prescribed under the SARFAESI Act.
19. In the facts and circumstances, when the action has been taken by the competent authority as
per the procedure prescribed by law and the person affected has a knowledge leaving no ambiguity
or confusion in initiating proceedings under the provisions of the SARFAESI Act by the secured
creditor, in our considered view, such action taken thereof cannot be held to be bad in law merely on
raising a trivial objection which has no legs to stand unless the person is able to show any
substantial prejudice being caused on account of the procedural lapse as prescribed under the Act or
the rules framed thereunder still with a caveat that it always depends upon the facts of each case to
decipher the nature of the procedural lapse being complained of and the resultant prejudiced if any,
being caused and there cannot be a straitjacket formula which can be uniformly followed in all the
transactions.
20. Adverting to facts of the instant case, we are of the view that the objection raised by the
respondents was trivial and technical in nature and the appellant (secured creditor) has complied
with the procedure prescribed under the SARFAESI Act. At the same time, the objection raised by
the respondents in the first instance, at the stage of filing of a Securitisation Application before DRT
under the SARFAESI Act is a feeble attempt which has persuaded the Tribunal and the High Court
to negate the proceedings initiated by the appellant under the SARFAESI Act, is unsustainable more
so, when the respondents are unable to justify the error in the procedure being followed by the
appellant (secured creditor) to be complied with in initiating proceedings under the SARFAESI Act.
21. The submission made by the respondent’s counsel that the notice under Section 13(2) of the Act
was served by the authorised signatory of “L&T Finance Ltd.” and that was not the secured creditor
in the facts of the case, in our considered view, is wholly without substance for the reason that “L&T
Finance Ltd.” and “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.” are the companies who in their correspondence with
all its customers use a common letterhead having their self−same authorised signatory, as being
manifest from the record and it is the seal being put at one stage by the authorised signatory due to
some human error of “L&T Finance Ltd.” in place of “L&T Housing Finance Ltd.”. More so, when it
is not the case of the respondents that there was any iota of confusion in their knowledge regarding
the action being initiated in the instant case other than the secured creditor under the SARFAESI
Act for non−fulfillment of the terms and conditions of the Facility Agreement dated 11 th August,
2015 or any substantial prejudice being caused apart from the technical objection being raised while
the demand notice under Section 13(2) was served under the SARFAESI Act or in the proceedings in
furtherance thereof no interference by the High Court in its limited scope of judicial review was
called for. Consequently, in our view, the judgment of the High Court is unsustainable and deserves
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
6

to be set aside.
22. In the result, the appeal succeeds and is accordingly, allowed. The impugned judgment dated 27
th June, 2019 passed by the High Court of Karnataka is hereby quashed and set aside. No costs.
23. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………….………………………….J. (L. NAGESWARA RAO) ……………..…………………………J. (HEMANT
GUPTA) ……………………………………….J. (AJAY RASTOGI) NEW DELHI OCTOBER 27, 2020
M/S L And T Housing Finance Limited vs M/S Trishul Developers on 27 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85423549/
7
