M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper
Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3163, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
569
Author: R.F. Nariman
Bench: Rohinton Fali Nariman, Navin Sinha, B.R. Gavai
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.2562 OF 2006
                         M/S. CENTROTRADE MINERALS AND
                         METALS INC.                                    …APPELLANT
                                                     VERSUS
                         HINDUSTAN COPPER LTD.                         ...RESPONDENT
                                                       WITH
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2564 OF 2006
                                                  JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1. This matter comes to this Bench after two previous forays to this Court.
2. The appellant before us, in Civil Appeal No.2562 of 2006, is a U.S. Corporation who had entered
into a contract for sale of 15,500 DMT of copper concentrate to be delivered at the Kandla Port in
the State of Gujarat, the said goods to be used at the Khetri Plant of the respondent Hindustan
Copper Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “HCL”/ “the respondent”), who is the appellant in the other
Civil Appeal No.2564 of 2006. After all consignments were delivered, payments had been made in
accordance with the contract. However, a dispute arose between the parties as regards the quantity
of dry weight of copper concentrate delivered. Clause 14 of the agreement contained a two-tier
arbitration agreement by which the first tier was to be settled by arbitration in India. If either party
disagrees with the result, that party will have the right to appeal to a second arbitration to be held by
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
1

the ICC in London. The appellant M/s Centrotrade Minerals and Metals Inc. (hereinafter referred to
as “Centrotrade”/ “the appellant”) invoked the arbitration clause. By an award dated 15.06.1999 the
arbitrator appointed by the Indian Council of Arbitration made a Nil Award. Thereupon,
Centrotrade invoked the second part of the arbitration agreement, as a result of which Jeremy Cook
QC, appointed by the ICC, delivered an award in London, dated 29.09.2001, in which the following
amounts were awarded:
“27. For the above reasons I THEREFORE AWARD and ADJUDGE that (1) HCL do
pay Centrotrade the sum of $152,112.33, inclusive of interest to the date of the Award
in respect of the purchase price for the first shipment. (2) HCL do pay Centrotrade
the sum of $15,815.59, inclusive of interest to the date of this Award in respect of
demurrage due on the first shipment.
(3) HCL, do pay Centrotrade the sum of $284,653.53, inclusive of interest to the date
of this Award in respect of the purchase price on the second shipment. (4) HCL do
pay Centrotrade their legal costs in this arbitration in the sum of $82,733 and in
addition the costs of the International Court of Arbitration, the Arbitrator's fees and
expenses totalling $29,000.
(5) HCL do pay Centrotrade compound interest on the above sums from the date of
this Award at 6% p.a. with quarterly rests until the date of actual payment.”
3. Even before Jeremy Cook QC could deliver his award, HCL, during the pendency of the
proceedings before the arbitrator in London, filed a suit in the Court at Khetri, in the State of
Rajasthan, challenging the arbitration clause. By an Order dated 27.04.2000, in a revision petition
filed against the Order of the Khetri Court, the High Court at Rajasthan restrained the appellant
from taking further steps in the London arbitration, pending hearing and disposal of the revision
petition. This ad interim ex parte stay granted by the High Court was ultimately vacated by the
Supreme Court only on 08.02.2001. Meanwhile, we are reliably informed that Mr. Cook, the learned
arbitrator, referred the matter of stay of the parties from proceeding with the London arbitration to
the ICC Court, which then decided that the arbitrator could continue with the arbitral proceedings.
4. When the said award dated 29.09.2001 was sought to be enforced by Centrotrade in India, a
learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court, after considering the objections of HCL, dismissed
the Section 48 petition filed by HCL, as a result of which the aforesaid foreign award became
executable in India. However, a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, by its judgment dated
28.07.2004, held that an appeal would be maintainable inasmuch as the London award could not be
said to be a foreign award, but that a two-tier arbitration clause would be valid. However, since the
Indian award and the London Award, being arbitration awards by arbitrators who had concurrent
jurisdiction, were mutually destructive of each other, neither could be enforced, as a result of which
the appeal was allowed and the judgment of the learned single Judge was set aside.
5. At this juncture, the matter came to a Division Bench of this Court. Two separate judgments were
delivered by S.B. Sinha, J. and Tarun Chatterjee, J. reported in Centrotrade Minerals & Metals Inc.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
2

v. Hindustan Copper Ltd. (2006) 11 SCC 245. After setting out the facts of the case, S.B. Sinha,J.
held that a two tier clause of the kind contained in clause 14 of this agreement is non est in the eye of
law and would be invalid under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act. In this view of the matter, the
foreign award could not enforced in India and Centrotrade’s appeal was therefore dismissed, the
appeal filed by HCL being allowed. Tarun Chatterjee, J. set out four questions in paragraph 134 as
follows:
“134. We have heard Mr Sarkar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Centrotrade
and Mr Debabrata Ray Choudhury, learned Senior Counsel for HCL. I have also
examined the entire material on record including the arbitration agreement, the
awards and judgments of the Division Bench as well as the learned Single Judge.
Before us, the following issues were raised by the learned counsel for the parties for
decision in the appeals:
(1) Whether the second part of clause 14 of the agreement providing for a two-tier
arbitration was valid and permissible in India under the Act?
(2) If it is valid, on the interpretation of clause 14 of the agreement, can it be said that
the ICC arbitrator sat in appeal against the award of the Indian arbitrator? (3)
Whether the ICC award is a foreign award or not? (4) Whether HCL was given proper
opportunity to present its case before the ICC arbitrator?”
6. These questions were answered by stating that the two-tier arbitration process was
valid and permissible in Indian law; that the ICC arbitrator sat in appeal against the
award of the Indian arbitrator; that the ICC award was a foreign award; but that since
HCL was not given a proper opportunity to present its case before the ICC arbitrator,
Centrotrade’s appeal would have to be dismissed and HCL’s appeal allowed.
7. The matter then came on a reference before a 3-Judge bench of this Court and is
reported in Centrotrade Minerals & Metal Inc. v.
Hindustan Copper Ltd. (2017) 2 SCC 228. The reference order was referred to in paragraph 1 of the
judgment of Lokur,J., as follows:
“These appeals have been referred [Centrotrade Minerals & Metals Inc. v. Hindustan
Copper Ltd., (2006) 11 SCC 245] to a Bench of three Judges in view of a difference of
opinion between the two learned Judges of this Court. The controversy is best
understood by referring to the proceedings recorded on 9-5-2006:
Hon'ble Mr Justice S.B. Sinha pronounced his Lordship's judgment of the Bench
comprising his Lordship and Hon'ble Mr Justice Tarun Chatterjee. Leave granted.
For the reasons mentioned in the signed judgment, civil appeal arising out of SLP (C)
No. 18611 of 2004 filed by M/s Centrotrade Minerals and Metal Inc., is dismissed and
civil appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 21340 of 2005 (actually 2004) preferred by
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
3

Hindustan Copper Ltd. is allowed. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case,
the parties shall pay and bear their own costs. Hon'ble Mr Justice Tarun Chatterjee
pronounced his Lordship's judgment disposing of the appeals in terms of the signed
judgment. In view of difference of opinion, the matter is referred to a larger Bench for
consideration. The Registry of this Court shall place the matter before the Hon'ble the
Chief Justice for constitution of a larger Bench.
The decisions rendered by Sinha and Chatterjee, JJ. are reported as Centrotrade
Minerals & Metals Inc. v. Hindustan Copper Ltd. [Centrotrade Minerals & Metals Inc.
v. Hindustan Copper Ltd., (2006) 11 SCC 245]” Paragraph 5 of the aforesaid
judgment set out the two questions that arose in this case as follows:
“5. The issues that have arisen for our consideration, as a result of the difference of
opinion between the learned Judges, are as under:
(1) Whether a settlement of disputes or differences through a two-tier arbitration
procedure as provided for in Clause 14 of the contract between the parties is
permissible under the laws of India?
(2) Assuming that a two-tier arbitration procedure is permissible under the laws of
India, whether the award rendered in the appellate arbitration being a “foreign
award” is liable to be enforced under the provisions of Section 48 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 at the instance of Centrotrade? If so, what is the relief that
Centrotrade is entitled to?
For the present, we propose to address only the first question and depending upon the answer, the
appeals would be set down for hearing on the remaining issue. We have adopted this somewhat
unusual course since the roster of business allowed us to hear the appeals only sporadically and
therefore the proceedings before us dragged on for about three months.” Since the first question was
answered in the affirmative, the Court concluded:
“Conclusion
48. In view of the above, the first question before us is answered in the affirmative.
The appeals should be listed again for consideration of the second question which
relates to the enforcement of the appellate award.”
8. This is how the appeals have been listed again for consideration of the second
question, which relates to enforcement of the London award.
9. Shri Gourab Banerjee, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of Centrotrade,
has taken us through the record and has relied strongly on this Court’s recent
judgment in Vijay Karia v. Prsymian Cavi E Sistemi SRL 2020 (3) SCALE 494. He
then referred in detail to the portions of the award which dealt with the natural
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
4

justice aspect of the case, as well as the judgment of the Single Judge of the Calcutta
High Court which dealt with the same. He then read out to us Chatterjee J’s views
contained in Centrotrade [2006] (supra) and contended that ample opportunity had
been given by the arbitrator to HCL to present its case, but that HCL, having an
Indian award in its pocket, wanted somehow to abort the London arbitration
proceedings. It first filed the suit that has been referred to, and obtained ex parte ad
interim stay against parties from proceeding in the arbitration on 27.04.2000, which
was vacated by the Supreme Court only on 08.02.2001. Jeremy Cook QC afforded as
many as six opportunities to HCL to present its case and bent over backwards by
extending time for filing of submissions and documents several times, and even
considered documents that were filed by HCL after the last deadline had been
extended, and then passed the award.
He, therefore, attacked Chatterjee J’s judgment, stating that it was factually incorrect when it stated
that a fair opportunity had not been given to HCL to present its case. Several other judgments both
Indian and foreign were cited by Shri Banerjee in support of his submission. Apart from relying
heavily on the judgment in Vijay Karia (supra), he relied upon the approach to a Section 48
proceeding by quoting from Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 6th Edn. and Merkin
and Flannery on the Arbitration Act, 1996.
10. Shri Harin P. Raval, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of HCL, has taken a preliminary
submission that the only point of difference between S.B. Sinha,J. and Tarun Chatterjee,J. was on
whether the two- tier arbitration clause was valid in law. Once that point had been answered, the
question of being unable to present one’s case, not having been decided by S.B. Sinha, J., was not
referred to the larger bench as there was no difference of opinion between the learned Judges on
this aspect and therefore this aspect cannot now be adjudicated upon. Even otherwise, he argued,
basing his submissions on a list of dates and a paper book of documents filed before this Court for
the first time, to show that as a matter of fact once the arbitrator had extended time, the last
extension being till 12.09.2001, he ought to have allowed further time in which, apart from legal
submissions furnished, documents could have been furnished in support of HCL’s case. This is
particularly in view of the fact that on 11.09.2001, a terrorist attack had taken place in New York as a
result of which globally, there was disruption of transport and communication, and therefore it was
very difficult for HCL to send documents within the requisite time. He argued that had such
documents been seen, there can be no doubt that this one-sided award might well have been in his
client’s favour, as a result of which serious prejudice had been caused to his clients. Even otherwise,
he argued that the issue of jurisdiction was to be taken as a preliminary question before the learned
arbitrator, after which further proceedings were to take place. This was never done by the learned
arbitrator. Also, the learned arbitrator in proceeding with the arbitration despite the ex parte ad
interim stay being granted by an Indian court resulted in his client being unable to present his case
before the arbitrator.
11. Having heard learned senior advocates for both parties, it is first necessary to set out the portions
of the award dated 29.09.2001 which deal with the aspect of HCL being unable to present its case
before the learned arbitrator. The learned arbitrator, after referring to the Rajasthan High Court
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
5

proceedings and the Supreme Court’s vacation of the stay, then found:
“7. As set out in paragraph 6 above, HCL, by a series of letters to the International
Court of Arbitration and to me, in my capacity as arbitrator, maintained that any
arbitration commenced under the second paragraph of Clause 14 of the contract is
null and void and until August 2001, refused to participate in it, even though they
were invited by me to do so without prejudice to their jurisdictional objections.
Despite this stance, Fox & Mandal were at all times consulted about the procedural
aspects of this arbitration, were asked for their submissions in relation to the
procedure, progress and substance of the dispute, received copies of all
correspondence passing between Centrotrade and myself and of all submissions
made and have been given every opportunity to take any point which they wished to
take in their defence. By Orders made on 20th December 2000, 19th January 2001
and 3rd May 2001, I directed that Centrotrade serve submissions and supporting
evidence, followed by HCL's Response and evidence in support, with a right in
Centrotrade to put in a reply in accordance with a clear timetable. When no Defence
Submissions or supporting evidence was served by HCL within the time prescribed, I
sent them a fax on 30th July 2001,giving them one last opportunity to inform me by
return of any intention on their part to put in a Defence and to seek an extension of
time for doing so.
8. Following a further fax on 9th August 2001, in which I informed the parties that I
was proceeding with the Award, on 11th August I received a fax from Fox & Mandal
requesting an extension of time of one month to put in a defence. On 16th August I
ordered that any submissions in support of an application for an extension of time for
a defence and any submissions on the substantive merits of the dispute, together with
any evidence relied on in relation to the application and any submissions should be
received by me by 31st August 2001, in the absence of which I would not give them
any consideration. On 27th August Fox & Mandal sought a further 3 weeks’ extension
of time for making their submissions and serving supporting evidence. I allowed a
final extension for these submissions and evidence until 12th September 2001.
Seventy - five pages of submissions were received by me on 13th September 2001,
without any supporting evidence or any justification for not complying with my
earlier orders. No grounds were put forward for any application for an extension of
time for putting in Defence submissions.
Indeed no formal application was made for an extension of time to do so. HCL have therefore not
attempted to justify their earlier stance nor to give me any reason for considering their submissions
on the merits which are made out of time. Centrotrade have objected to these submissions
contending that they are inadmissible because of HCL’s persistent breaches of my orders.
Nonetheless, though not bound to do so because of their belated nature, I have considered those
submissions and taken them fully into account in making this Award. I made plain in my orders that
no further material provided thereafter would be taken into account, and I have not done so.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
6

9. In their submissions HCL maintained their arguments as to lack of jurisdiction and the invalidity
of this London Arbitration but without prejudice to that, put forward submissions both on the
jurisdictional arguments, the nullity of the second paragraph of the Arbitration clause in the
contract and on the merits of the dispute. It is clear that this dispute can be determined on the
documents turning, as it does essentially on points of construction of the contract and matters of
Indian law.” (emphasis supplied) Ultimately, the arbitrator awarded costs for the London
proceeding, declining to award costs for the arbitration that had taken place in India.
12. The learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court, while dealing with the objections as to
breach of natural justice, dismissed the aforesaid objections as follows:
“Mr. Roy Choudhury then submits that in view of Section 48(1)(b) of the Act, the
award is not enforceable, as neither notice of appointment of arbitrator was given to
the respondent, nor was it given opportunity to present its case. The arbitrator
followed the ICC Arbitration and Conciliation Rules, though they were not mentioned
by the parties in the arbitration agreement, hence in view of Section 48(1)(b) of the
Act the award was not enforceable.
Mr. Sarkar replies that the respondent was given all opportunities to present its case,
but it showed total non-cooperation with the arbitrator. The arbitral procedure
followed by the arbitrator does not militate against the arbitration agreement.
I find that the petitioner approached the ICC International Court of Arbitration on
February 22nd, 2000. The respondent filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Junior
Division, Khetry on March 28th 2000; it wanted to stop the second arbitration in
terms of the arbitration agreement. The arbitrator was appointed on June 7th, 2000.
Till August 2001 the respondent maintained that the second part of the arbitration
agreement being against the public policy of India, the arbitration through the ICC
International Court of Arbitration was not permissible. On this ground the
respondent refused to participate in the arbitral proceeding. It took the matter upto
the Apex Court.
Ultimately when it failed to obtain any order to stop the arbitration, it filed its
submissions running into seventy- five pages. Though the papers reached the
arbitrator beyond the stipulated date, he has considered such submissions. He,
however, did not find any merit in the case made out by the respondent. The
arbitrator has recorded that at every stage he consulted the procedural aspects with
the solicitors representing the respondent. There is no proof that the respondent ever
objected to the rules and procedure followed by the arbitrator or that the arbitrator
followed a procedure not contemplated in the agreement. It is apparent from the
award that all opportunities were given to the respondent to present its case. I find no
merit in the contentions that notice regarding appointment of the arbitrator was not
given to the respondent or that the terms of reference were settled behind its back.
The respondent had full knowledge of everything; it was informed about everything.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
7

Hence I find no substance in the grievance that the respondent was unable to present
its case or that procedure not contemplated by the agreement of the parties was
followed by the arbitrator.”
13. In appeal, the Division Bench, in view of its finding that the award is not a foreign award,
declined to apply Section 50 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “Arbitration
Act”), and then stated that the London award is declared to be inexecutable so long as the Indian Nil
Award stands. In view of this finding, it did not go into the natural justice point argued by HCL.
14. In the first round in this court, S.B. Sinha,J. did not go into the natural justice point, in view of
his finding that the arbitration clause itself was null and void. Chatterjee,J., after agreeing with
Centrotrade’s case on the arbitration clause, then went into issue no. 4 and held as follows:
“Issue 4 Whether HCL was given proper opportunity to present its case before the
ICC arbitrator?
164. Under Section 48(1)(b) enforcement of a foreign award can be refused if:
“48. (1)(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice
of the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise
unable to present his case;” (emphasis supplied)
165. In the case at hand, HCL had the knowledge of appointment of the arbitrator. In
fact, it had approached the Indian courts to stall the ICC arbitral proceedings.
On a special leave petition filed by Centrotrade against the order of the Rajasthan High Court
staying the ICC arbitral proceedings, an order was passed by this Court by which the stay order of
the Rajasthan High Court was vacated on 8-2-2001 and directions were given for the ICC
proceedings to continue in accordance with law.
166. It is true, in his award, Mr Jeremy Lionel Cooke, the ICC arbitrator has noted that he was
appointed by ICC on 7-6-2000 and that HCL refused to participate in the arbitral proceedings on
the ground that the second arbitration clause in the contract was null and void. He directed
Centrotrade and HCL to file submissions and supporting evidence through orders dated
20-12-2000, 19-1-2001 and 3-5-2001. However, HCL did not comply with these orders. On
30-7-2001, he sent a fax to HCL to find out whether they intended to file their defence. He sent a
further fax on 9-8-2001 informing them that he was proceeding with the award. (emphasis
supplied) Then on 11-8-2001, the ICC arbitrator received a reply seeking extension of time. He
granted time till 31-8- 2001. He received another request from HCL's representatives on 27-8-2001
for further extension of time. He granted extension till 12-9-2001. He received the first set of
submissions filed by HCL, without supporting evidence, on 13-9-2001. He considered those
submissions and took them into account while making the award. He has further recorded in his
award that:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
8

“I made plain in my orders that no further material provided thereafter would be
taken into account, and I have not done so.” (emphasis supplied) This last statement
indicates that he received further material from HCL, which he did not consider
while making the award. On the face of it, it seems that HCL was given sufficient
opportunity to present its case by the arbitrator. However, this question must be
looked into from the then existing situation.
167. It must be noted that this Court vacated the stay on the proceedings on 8-2-2001. The first
direction of the ICC arbitrator to the parties, after the order of this Court on 8-2-2001, to serve
submissions to him was made on 3-5-2001 i.e. after a time gap of nearly 3 months. Cooperation of
HCL was next requested only on 30-7-2001 i.e. after a time gap of nearly 2 months. Then the
communication on 9-8-2001 stated that the arbitrator was proceeding with the award. This time
there was a response from HCL. Upon these requests, a time-limit of nearly one month ending on
12-9-2001 was given to HCL. The arbitrator received the first set of submissions filed by HCL on
13-9-2001. Then he made the award 16 days later on 29-9-2001. It seems that between 13-9-2001
and 29-9-2001, he did receive further material from HCL which he did not consider while making
the award on the ground that they were received after the time-limit granted by him to HCL had
lapsed.
168. It is clear from the above layout of facts that there have been delays in the arbitral proceedings
right from the beginning when Centrotrade approached ICC on 22-2-2000. Most of the delays were
due to HCL's refusal to participate in the proceedings. However, there were some delays which
cannot be related to HCL's conduct. For instance, the period from 8-2-2001 when the order of this
Court was made to 3-5-2001 when the first direction of the arbitrator was made. The whole arbitral
proceeding was conducted in a manner indicative of lack of urgency. Further, I find merit in the
submission of HCL that due to the total dislocation of air traffic caused by the terrorist attack of
11-9-2001, the materials sent by HCL to the ICC arbitrator reached late. Under these circumstances,
a delay of few days in serving their submissions with supporting evidence, after having accepted to
participate in the arbitral proceedings, seems excusable and should have been excused. Considering
the overall picture of the circumstances and the delays, refusal of the arbitrator to consider the
material received by him after 13-9-2001 and before 29-9-2001, seems to be based on a frivolous
technicality. The arbitrator ought to have considered all the material received by him before he
made the award on 29-9-2001. Considering the decisions in Hari Om Maheshwari v. Vinitkumar
Parikh [(2005) 1 SCC 379] and Minmetal Germany GmbH v. Ferco Steel Ltd. [ (1999) 1 All ER
(Comm) 315] it is true that where a party is refused an adjournment and where it is not prevented
from presenting its case, it cannot, normally, claim violation of natural justice and denial of a fair
hearing. However, in the light of the delays, some of which were not attributable to HCL's conduct,
it was only fair to excuse HCL's lapse in filing the relevant material on time. Therefore, it can be said
that HCL did not get a fair hearing and could not effectively present its case.
169. For the reasons aforesaid, I am of the view that HCL could not effectively present its case before
the ICC arbitrator and therefore enforcement of the ICC award should be refused in view of Section
48(1)(b) of the Act. Accordingly, the judgment of the Division Bench and also the judgment of the
learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court must be set aside and the matter be remitted back
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
9

to the ICC arbitrator for fresh disposal of the arbitral proceedings in accordance with law after
giving fair and reasonable opportunity to both the parties to present their cases before him. In view
of the fact that I have set aside the award of the ICC arbitrator on the ground that HCL was unable
to effectively present its case before the ICC arbitrator, in compliance with Section 48(1)(b) of the
Act, I direct the ICC arbitrator to pass a fresh award within three months from the date of
commencement of the fresh arbitral proceedings.”
15. The law on the subject matter of Section 48(1)(b) of the Arbitration Act has been laid down in a
recent judgment of this Court in Vijay Karia (supra). In paragraph 21 of the aforesaid judgment, this
Court stated that it was important to note that no challenge was made to the aforesaid award under
the English arbitration law, though available, just as in the facts of the present case. This Court then
set out the parameters of a Section 48 challenge which reaches this Court as follows:
“24. Before referring to the wide ranging arguments on both sides, it is important to
emphasise that, unlike Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, which is contained in Part I
of the said Act, and which provides an appeal against either setting aside or refusing
to set aside a ‘domestic’ arbitration award, the legislative policy so far as recognition
and enforcement of foreign awards is that an appeal is provided against a judgment
refusing to recognise and enforce a foreign award but not the other way around (i.e.
an order recognising and enforcing an award). This is because the policy of the
legislature is that there ought to be only one bite at the cherry in a case where
objections are made to the foreign award on the extremely narrow grounds contained
in Section 48 of the Act and which have been rejected. This is in consonance with the
fact that India is a signatory to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as “New York Convention”)
and intends - through this legislation - to ensure that a person who belongs to a
Convention country, and who, in most cases, has gone through a challenge procedure
to the said award in the country of its origin, must then be able to get such award
recognised and enforced in India as soon as possible. This is so that such person may
enjoy the fruits of an award which has been challenged and which challenge has been
turned down in the country of its origin, subject to grounds to resist enforcement
being made out under Section 48 of the Arbitration Act. Bearing this in mind, it is
important to remember that the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction under Article 136
should not be used to circumvent the legislative policy so contained. We are saying
this because this matter has been argued for several days before us as if it was a first
appeal from a judgment recognising and enforcing a foreign award. Given the
restricted parameters of Article 136, it is important to note that in cases like the
present - where no appeal is granted against a judgment which recognises and
enforces a foreign award - this Court should be very slow in interfering with such
judgments, and should entertain an appeal only with a view to settle the law if some
new or unique point is raised which has not been answered by the Supreme Court
before, so that the Supreme Court judgment may then be used to guide the course of
future litigation in this regard. Also, it would only be in a very exceptional case of a
blatant disregard of Section 48 of the Arbitration Act that the Supreme Court would
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
10

interfere with a judgment which recognises and enforces a foreign award however
inelegantly drafted the judgment may be. With these prefatory remarks we may now
go on to the submissions of counsel.” The Court then went on to refer to Minmetals
Germany GmbH v. Ferco Steel Ltd. (1999) C.L.C. 647 in paragraph 59, and Jorf
Lasfar Energy Co. v. AMCI Export Corp. 2008 WL 1228930 in paragraph 61 as
follows:
“59. The English judgments advocate applying the test of a person being prevented
from presenting its case by matters outside his control. This was done in Minmetals
Germany GmbH v. Ferco Steel Ltd. (1999) C.L.C. 647 as follows:
“In my judgment, the inability to present a case to arbitrators within s.103(2)(c)
contemplates at least that the enforcee has been prevented from presenting his case
by matters outside his control. This will normally cover the case where the procedure
adopted has been operated in a manner contrary to the rules of natural justice.
Where, however, the enforcee has, due to matters within his control, not provided
himself with the means of taking advantage of an opportunity given to him to present
his case, he does not in my judgment, bring himself within that exception to
enforcement under the convention. In the present case that is what has happened”
xxx xxx xxx
61. An application of this test is found in Jorf Lasfar Energy Co. v. AMCI Export Corp.
2008 WL 1228930, where the U.S District Court, W.D. Pennsylvania decided that if a
party fails to obey procedural orders given by the arbitrator, it must suffer the
consequences. If evidence is excluded because it is not submitted in accordance with
a procedural order, a party cannot purposefully ignore the procedural directives of
the decision-making body and then successfully claim that the procedures were
unfair or violative of due process. Likewise, in Dongwoo Mann+Hummel Co. Ltd. v.
Mann+Hummel GmbH (2008) SGHC 275, the Singapore High Court held:
“145. A deliberate refusal to comply with a discovery order is not per se a
contravention of public policy because the adversarial procedure in arbitration
admits of the possible sanction of an adverse inference being drawn against the party
that does not produce the document in question in compliance with an order. The
tribunal will of course consider all the relevant facts and circumstances, and the
submissions by the parties before the tribunal decides whether or not to draw an
adverse inference for the non-production. Dongwoo also had the liberty to apply to
the High Court to compel production of the documents under s 13 and 14 of the IAA,
if it was not content with merely arguing on the question of adverse inference and if it
desperately needed the production by M+H of those documents for its inspection so
that it could properly argue the point on drawing an adverse inference. However,
Dongwoo chose not to do so.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
11

146. Further, the present case was not one where a party hides even the existence of
the damning document and then dishonestly denies its very existence so that the
opposing party does not even have the chance to submit that an adverse inference
ought to be drawn for non-production. M+H in fact disclosed the existence of the
documents but gave reasons why it could not disclose them. Here, Dongwoo had the
full opportunity to submit that an adverse inference ought to be drawn, but it failed to
persuade the tribunal to draw the adverse inference.
The tribunal examined the other evidence before it, considered the submissions of the parties and
rightfully exercised its fact finding and decision making powers not to draw the adverse inference as
it was entitled to do so. It would appear to me that the tribunal was doing nothing more than
exercising its normal fact finding powers to determine whether or not an adverse inference ought to
be drawn.”” The Court finally summed up its conclusion on this aspect of the case, as follows:
“76. Given the fact that the object of Section 48 is to enforce foreign awards subject to
certain well-defined narrow exceptions, the expression “was otherwise unable to
present his case” occurring in Section 48(1)(b) cannot be given an expansive meaning
and would have to be read in the context and colour of the words preceding the said
phrase. In short, this expression would be a facet of natural justice, which would be
breached only if a fair hearing was not given by the arbitrator to the parties. Read
along with the first part of Section 48(1)(b), it is clear that this expression would
apply at the hearing stage and not after the award has been delivered, as has been
held in Ssangyong (supra). A good working test for determining whether a party has
been unable to present his case is to see whether factors outside the party’s control
have combined to deny the party a fair hearing. Thus, where no opportunity was
given to deal with an argument which goes to the root of the case or findings based on
evidence which go behind the back of the party and which results in a denial of justice
to the prejudice of the party; or additional or new evidence is taken which forms the
basis of the award on which a party has been given no opportunity of rebuttal, would,
on the facts of a given case, render a foreign award liable to be set aside on the
ground that a party has been unable to present his case. This must, of course, be with
the caveat that such breach be clearly made out on the facts of a given case, and that
awards must always be read supportively with an inclination to uphold rather than
destroy, given the minimal interference possible with foreign awards under Section
48.”
16. Shri Raval took exception to the interpretation of the word “otherwise” occurring in Section
48(1)(b) and cited a Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Kavalappara Kottarathil Kochuni
v. States of Madras and Kerala (1960) 3 SCR 887, for the proposition that the expression “otherwise”
cannot be read ejusdem generis with words that precede it.
17. Kochuni’s case (supra) was concerned with the constitutional validity of the Madras
Marumakkathayam (Removal of Doubts) Act, 1955. Section 2(b) of the aforesaid Act reads as
follows:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
12

“2. Notwithstanding any decision of Court, any sthanam in respect of which:
(b) the members of the tarwad have been receiving maintenance from the properties
purporting to be sthanam properties as of right, or in pursuance of a custom or
otherwise” The Constitution Bench then held:
“The word “otherwise” in the context, it is contended, must be construed by applying
the rule of ejusdem generis. The rule is that when general words follow particular and
specific words of the same nature, the general words must be confined to the things
of the same kind as those specified. But it is clearly laid down by decided case that the
specific words must form a distinct genus or category. It is not an inviolable rule of
law, but is only permissible inference in the absence of an indication to the contrary.
On the basis of this rule, is contended, that the right or the custom mentioned in the
clause is a distinct genus and the words “or otherwise” must be confined to things
analogous to right or contract such as lost grant, immemorial user etc. It appears to
us that the word “otherwise” in the context only means “whatever may be the origin
of the receipt of maintenance”. One of the objects of the legislation is to by-pass the
decrees of courts and the Privy Council observed that the receipt of maintenance
might even be out of bounty. It is most likely that a word of the widest amplitude was
used to cover even acts of charity and bounty. If that be so, under the impugned Act
even a payment of maintenance out of charity would destroy the character of an
admitted sthanam which ex facie is expropriatory and unreasonable.” Given the
object of the 1955 Act, the Constitution Bench was careful to state that the word
“otherwise” in the context only means “whatever may be the origin of the receipt of
maintenance”.
18. P. Ramanatha Aiyar’s Advanced Law Lexicon defines the expression “otherwise” as follows:
“Otherwise. By other like means; contrarily; different from that to which it relates; in
a different manner; in another way; in any other way; differently in other respects in
different respects; in some other like capacity.” The Law Lexicon then refers to an
early judgment of Cleasby B. in Monck v. Hilton 46 LJNC 167, in which it is stated as
follows:
“As a general rule “otherwise” when following an enumeration, should receive an
ejusdem generis interpretation (per CLEASBY, B. Monck v. Hilton, 46 LJMC 167, The
words ‘or otherwise,’ in law, when used as a general phrase following an enumeration
of particulars, are commonly interpreted in a restricted sense, as referring to such
other matters as are kindred to the classes before mentioned.” As has been held in
paragraph 76 of Vijay Karia (supra), the context of Section 48 is recognition and
enforcement of foreign awards under the New York Convention of 1958. Given the
context of the New York Convention, and the fact that the expression “otherwise” is
susceptible to two meanings, it is clear that the narrower meaning has been
preferred, which is in consonance with the pro-enforcement bias spoken about by a
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
13

large number of judgments referred to in Vijay Karia (supra).
Kochuni’s case (supra) dealing with an entirely different Act with a different object
cannot, therefore, possibly apply to construe this word in the setting in which it
occurs.
19. As a matter of fact, three earlier judgments of this Court, all under the Arbitration Act, 1940, are
also instructive. The ground on which a domestic award could be set aside under Section 30 of the
1940 Act, inter alia, was if the arbitrator misconducted himself or the proceedings. It will be seen
that “misconduct” as a ground for setting aside an award is conceptually much wider than a party
being unable to present its case before the arbitrator, which is contained in Section 48(1)(b). Thus,
in Ganges Waterproof Works (P) Ltd. v. Union of India (1999) 4 SCC 33, this Court was faced with
the legality and validity of the arbitration proceedings, three grounds being raised as follows:
“2. Challenge to the legality and validity of the arbitration proceedings has been laid
on three grounds: firstly, that the claimant-Union of India (respondent herein) filed
an additional statement accompanied by documents before the arbitrator on
11-8-1982, which was the last day of hearing, and that was taken into consideration
by the arbitrator without affording the petitioner an opportunity for contesting the
same or even delivering a copy thereof to the petitioner; secondly, though no oral
evidence was adduced by any of the parties, yet the arbitrator has in his award
expressed having heard the evidence which shows inapplication of mind to the record
of the proceedings and material available before the arbitrator; and thirdly, that the
arbitrator in the sitting held on 11-8- 1982 heard the parties hardly for five or seven
minutes in which limited time, no real hearing could have taken place. It is submitted
that the manner in which the arbitrator has conducted himself, has resulted in
violation of the principles of natural justice and vitiated the arbitration proceedings.
Similar grounds were raised before the learned Single Judge as also in the intra-court
appeal before the High Court and have been turned down. Having heard the learned
counsel for the parties, we are also of the opinion that here too the petitioner must
meet the same fate.” So far as the first ground was concerned, it was held that as a
matter of fact, nothing was filed by the Union of India on 11.08.1982 and the
additional statement and documents that were filed by the Union of India before the
learned arbitrator was way before on 31.05.1982. This being so, and as no specific
case was made out in an additional affidavit before the learned single Judge
supporting the plea that the additional statement and documents that were furnished
could not be effectively dealt with by the appellant, plea no.1 was turned down. The
third contention was then disposed of as follows:
“6. The third and the last plea urged is equally devoid of any merit. The burden of
substantiating the averment urged as an objection tantamounting to misconduct on
the part of the arbitrator or complaining of violation of the principles of natural
justice was on the petitioner. No evidence was adduced to substantiate the plea. The
best person to depose as to what had actually transpired at the hearing and whether
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
14

the same was a real hearing or an eyewash merely was the counsel who actually made
submissions on behalf of the petitioner before the arbitrator. The least that was
expected of the petitioner was to have filed an affidavit of the counsel before the
Court. That was not done. No timely protest was raised before the arbitrator. The
hearing was concluded on 11-8-1982 and the award was made on 23-8-1982. During
these 12 days also, the petitioner- Company never urged before the arbitrator that
submissions on its behalf were not permitted to be made by the arbitrator. The
learned Single Judge, as also the Division Bench, have arrived at a finding that the
plea was an afterthought and certainly not substantiated. We also do not find any
reason to take a view different from the one taken by the High Court.”
20. In Sohan Lal Gupta v. Asha Devi Gupta (2003) 7 SCC 492, this Court dealt with the arbitrator
misconducting the proceedings as follows:
“27. The arbitrator, as appears from the minutes of the meeting, proceeded only on
the documentary evidence. No party appears to have presented oral evidence. Thus,
the question of cross-examination of the witnesses appearing on behalf of the other
parties did not arise. Submissions must have been made by the parties themselves.
Ghanshyamdas Gupta does not say that he had difficulty in appearing on 15-6-1976
or any subsequent date and he had asked for an adjournment. Even otherwise, a
party has no absolute right to insist on his convenience being consulted in every
respect. The matter is within the discretion of the arbitrator and the Court will
intervene only in the event of positive abuse. (See Montrose Canned Foods Ltd.
[(1965) 1 Lloyd's Rep 597] ) If a party, after being given proper notice, chooses not to
appear, then the proceedings may properly continue in his absence. (See British Oil
and Cake Mills Ltd. v. Horace Battin & Co. Ltd. [(1922) 13 LI L Rep 443] )” (emphasis
supplied) In a significant paragraph which foreshadowed the law as it is today, this
Court referred to the Minmetals (supra) judgment and held as follows:
“43. Furthermore, in this case Ghanshyamdas Gupta expressly relinquished his right
by filing an application stating that he would withdraw his objection. Such
relinquishment in a given case can also be inferred from the conduct of the party. The
defence which was otherwise available to Ghanshyamdas Gupta would not be
available to others who took part in the proceedings. They cannot take benefit of the
plea taken by Ghanshyamdas Gupta. Each party complaining violation of natural
justice will have to prove the misconduct of the Arbitration Tribunal in denial of
justice to them. The appellant must show that he was otherwise unable to present his
case which would mean that the matters were outside his control and not because of
his own failure to take advantage of an opportunity duly accorded to him. (See
Minmetals Germany GmbH v. Ferco Steel Ltd. [(1999) 1 All ER (Comm) 315] ) This
Court's decision in Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric Co. [1994 Supp (1)
SCC 644 : AIR 1994 SC 860] is also a pointer to the said proposition of law.”
(emphasis supplied)
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
15

21. In Hari Om Maheshwari v. Vinitkumar Parikh (2005) 1 SCC 379, this Court recorded the
arguments of learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant on the natural justice aspect of
the case as follows:
“7. Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant herein
contended that the grounds on which the High Court has set aside the award are not
the grounds contemplated under Section 30 of the Act. He submitted that arbitration
proceedings having started in the year 1995 could not be completed even in the year
1999, therefore, the High Court ought not to have interfered with the award. He
pointed out that in Reference Case No. 313 of 1995 pertaining to Deepa Jain the
evidence had already concluded and the explanation given by the respondent for not
leading evidence on 10-5-1999 was frivolous and the arbitrators rightly did not
entertain a prayer for granting a further opportunity for leading evidence. Such a
denial of a further opportunity by the arbitrators would not be a ground
contemplated under Section 30 of the Act to set aside the award. Hence, the courts
below have gone beyond the scope of Section 30 of the Act while allowing petitions to
set aside the arbitration awards.” The learned Single Judge’s finding in the aforesaid
case, which was accepted by the Division Bench judgment on the facts of the case, is
set out in paragraph 12 of the said judgment as follows:
“12. It is the above award that was challenged under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act,
1940 before the learned Single Judge by the respondent which came to be allowed by
the learned Single Judge. While doing so learned Single Judge observed:
“the cross-examination of M/s D. Jain and Co. was over in 1997, the
cross-examination of witness examined in Shri Maheshwari's reference was
completed on 8-4- 1999 and the arbitrators adjourned the matter to 10-5- 1999 and
11-5-1999 for the petitioner to lead his evidence. However, it appears that the
petitioner noted a wrong date and therefore, he did not appear on 10-5- 1999. It is
clear from the record that there is an application submitted by the petitioner before
the arbitrators on 20-5-1999 regarding the mistake committed by him in recording
the date of hearing and requested the arbitrators to give an opportunity to lead the
evidence. One can understand if the arbitrators have after closing the matter for
award delivered the award immediately but since the arbitrators had not delivered
their award by 20-5-1999, they also did not deliver their award immediately
thereafter, but waited till November 1999 to make their award, the arbitrators could
have easily permitted the petitioner to lead evidence. I do not think that the
arbitrators were justified in denying the petitioner an opportunity to lead
evidence….” This finding of the learned Single Judge has been accepted by the
Division Bench without any further discussion.” This Court then set aside the Single
Judge’s judgment in language that is even more appropriate today, given the object of
the Arbitration Act, 1996, as follows:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
16

“16. From the above it is seen that the jurisdiction of the court entertaining a petition
or application for setting aside an award under Section 30 of the Act is extremely
limited to the grounds mentioned therein and we do not think that grant or refusal of
an adjournment by an arbitrator comes within the parameters of Section 30 of the
Act. At any rate the arbitrator's refusal of an adjournment sought in 1999 in an
arbitration proceeding pending since 1995 cannot at all be said to be perverse
keeping in mind the object of the Act as an alternate dispute resolution system aimed
at speedy resolution of disputes.”
22. Shri Banerjee then referred to a number of judgments including Cuckurova Holding A.S. v.
Sonera Holding B.V. (2014) UKPC 15 of the Privy Council. In this judgment, the Minmetals (supra)
test was referred to with approval as follows:
“31. Section 36(2)(c) is in the same terms as section 103(2)(c) of the Arbitration Act
1996 in England. They reflect Article V(1)(b) of the New York Convention. In
Minmetals Germany GmbH v Ferco Steel Ltd [1999] CLC 647, 658 Colman J said
that the subsection contemplates that the enforcee has been prevented from
presenting his case by matters outside his control, which will normally cover the case
where the procedure adopted has been operated in a manner contrary to the rules of
natural justice. In Kanoria v Guinness [2006] EWCA Civ 222 Lord Phillips CJ held in
the Court of Appeal that, on the ordinary meaning of section 103(2)(c), a party to an
arbitration is unable to present his case if he is never informed of the case he is called
upon to meet. He referred to the statements in Minmetals referred to above with
approval. xxx xxx xxx
34. The general approach to enforcement of an award should be pro-enforcement.
See eg Parsons & Whittemore Overseas Co Inc v Société Générale 508 F 2d 969
(1974) at 973:
“The 1958 Convention’s basic thrust was to liberalize procedures for enforcing foreign
arbitral awards … [it] clearly shifted the burden of proof to the party defending
against enforcement and limited his defences to seven set forth in Article V.” In IPCO
(Nigeria) v Nigerian National Petroleum [2005] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 326, Gross J said at
para 11, when considering the equivalent provision of the English Arbitration Act
1996:
“… there can be no realistic doubt that section 103 of the Act embodies a
pre-disposition to favour enforcement of New York Convention awards, reflecting the
underlying purpose of the New York Convention itself …” The Board agrees. There
must therefore be good reasons for refusing to enforce a New York Convention
award. The Board can see no basis upon which it should refuse to enforce the award
here if Cukurova fails to show that it was unable to present its case for reasons
beyond its control.” The Privy Council, on facts, then dealt with the natural justice
ground by rejecting it as follows:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
17

“53. The approach of the Tribunal described above and the reasoning in the First
Partial Award shows that it gave Cukurova every opportunity to develop its case. The
basis upon which the Tribunal reached its conclusions is clear. As stated above, the
Tribunal indicated that it assumed Mr Berkmen’s evidence to be true. It is therefore
difficult to see on what grounds Cukurova can properly complain. It is not suggested
that the Tribunal deliberately ignored Mr Berkmen’s evidence. Although Cukurova
submits that the outcome of the arbitration would have been different if Mr Berkmen
had had an opportunity to be heard, it does not identify on what basis. It is of course
no part of the role of the enforcing court to consider whether the decision was correct
either in law or on the facts.”
23. In Eastern European Engineering v. Vijay Consulting (2019) 1 LLR 1 (QBD), the Queen’s Bench
Division dealt with the “inability to present case” challenge by following Cukorova Holdings (supra)
and Minmetals (supra), and then concluding:
“89. It was also common ground that, as indicated as a "given" by Lord Clarke in
Cukorova at [53], the party challenging the award must also demonstrate that the
outcome of the arbitration would have been different had there been no breach of
natural justice.” Applying the test of “matters outside one’s control”, it was found that
VCL’s challenge on this ground was not outside its control as follows:
“98. In this specific context what VCL did not do (and perfectly well could have done)
was to raise with the arbitrator the question of whether the form of his order in fact
shut them out from putting in a statement from Dr du Toit Malan, or to make
submissions as to why they needed to get evidence from some other identified person
in order to respond to the submissions made. Instead they chose to seek to challenge
the decision on the basis that they should be allowed to put in new evidence which
covered all issues, not simply in response to Large 3. This decision to challenge on
one basis and not the other is a matter which was entirely within VCL's control.
99. In those circumstances too I accept the submission that the admission of Large 3
(or failure to allow responsive evidence) would not have had an impact on the result
of the arbitration. The liability decision was based on the earlier reports of Mr Large
and other witnesses. That is common ground. In relation to quantum, the arbitrator's
reliance upon Large 3 had the effect of reducing the quantum awarded to EEEL (by
some €9 million). It therefore cannot be said that VCL was prejudiced by Large 3. If it
was prejudiced it was by its failure to avail itself of the opportunity given it to
respond.” (emphasis supplied)
24. Jorf Lasfar (supra), referred to in paragraph 61 of Vijay Karia (supra), is also
instructive. This case deals with a specific plea relating to natural justice in relation to
a Tribunal’s procedural orders as follows:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
18

“7. We disagree. AMCI was given a full and fair opportunity to present its case.
However, AMCI failed to meet its obligations under the Tribunal's procedural orders,
3 and suffered the consequences. It failed to submit any witness statements by the
deadline set forth by the Tribunal. Rather, AMCI attempted to name Mr. Thrasher as
a witness after the deadline, and without submitting a witness statement. AMCI
submitted no documentary evidence save a governmental report indicating that coal
was in short supply around the time of the alleged breach.
xxx xxx xxx
9. The requirements of Procedural Order No. 4 are clear, reasonable, and common in
international arbitration practice. There is no dispute that AMCI understood what
the Order required at the time. A party cannot purposefully ignore the procedural
directives of a decision-making body, and then successfully claim that the procedures
were fundamentally unfair, or violated due process. Under the circumstances, we find
that AMCI has failed to satisfy its burden to prove that the arbitral process violated
our basic notions of fundamental fairness and justice. As such, AMCI cannot avail
itself of either the Article V(1)(b) defense or the Article V(2)(b) defense.” (emphasis
supplied)
25. Shri Banerjee then referred to two United States District Court judgments. In
Consorcio Rive v. Briggs of Cancun 134 F. Supp 2d 789, the US District Court, E.D.
Louisiana, found that Briggs of Cancun, the respondent before it, refused to
participate in the arbitration due to alleged criminal proceedings in Cancun. At the
trial, David Briggs (representative of the respondent therein) testified that he did not
seek alternative ways to appear at the hearings such as by way of telephone, nor did
he send a representative of the company to appear on behalf of the company. In this
fact situation, Article V(1)(b) of the New York Convention was referred to, the court
finding:
“26. Because Briggs of Cancun was continuously informed of all hearing dates and
was provided sufficient opportunity to present witnesses and evidence in defense of
the action, Briggs of Cancun was given proper notice of the arbitration proceedings.
27. The due process guarantee incorporated in article V(1) (b) of the Convention
requires that "an arbitrator must provide a fundamentally fair hearing." Generica
Ltd., 125 F.3d at 1130. "A fundamentally fair hearing is one that `meets "the minimal
requirements of fairness"
adequate notice, a hearing on the evidence, and an impartial decision by the arbitrator.'" Id.
"[P]arties that have chosen to remedy their disputes through arbitration rather than litigation
should not expect the same procedures they would find in the judicial arena." Id. Essentially, in
exchange for the convenience and other benefits obtained through arbitration, parties lose "the right
to seek redress from the court for all but the most exceptional errors at arbitration." Dean v.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
19

Sullivan, 118 F.3d 1170, 1173 (7th Cir.1997).
28. Consistent with the federal policy of encouraging arbitration and enforcing arbitration awards,
the defense that a party was "unable to present its case"
raised pursuant to article V(1) (b) of the Convention is narrowly construed. Parsons &
Whittemore Overseas Co. v. Societe Generale de L'Industrie du Papier, 508 F.2d 969,
975 (2d Cir.1974).
29. In the instant case, the Court finds that Briggs of Cancun was not "unable to present its case,"
because Briggs of Cancun could have participated by means other than David Briggs's physical
presence at the arbitration. For instance, Briggs of Cancun could have sent a company
representative to attend; could have sent its attorney to attend; or David Briggs could have attended
by telephone.
30. Moreover, the evidence indicates that Briggs of Cancun did participate to the extent that it
designated an arbitrator and filed over 80 pages of legal argument and documentation in support of
its position. Because Briggs of Cancun has brought forward no additional information or evidence
that it would have presented at the arbitration if it had the opportunity to do so, the Court finds that
Briggs of Cancun did have an opportunity to meaningfully participate in the arbitration.
xxx xxx xxx
33. For the foregoing reasons, the Court finds that Briggs of Cancun's defense under article V(1) (b)
of the Convention must fail. The Court also specifically finds that even if there was a valid arrest
warrant pending against David Briggs for some period of time, Briggs of Cancun is not entitled to a
defense under article V(1)
(b) of the Convention because Briggs of Cancun could have participated through its Mexican
attorney or corporate representative or by telephone. Further, Briggs of Cancun has not
demonstrated that it was prejudiced in any way by whatever restrictions the alleged criminal action
might have imposed, because it has not pointed to exonerating evidence that it would have
presented, but could not, but for the filing of the criminal Statement of Facts.”
26. In Four Seasons Hotels v. Consorcio Barr S.A. 613 Supp 2d 1362 (S.D. Fla. 2009), the U.S
District Court, S.D. Florida, dealt with the respondent, having discontinued its participation in the
arbitral proceedings just prior to the final evidential hearings, as follows:
“Moreover, regardless of the decision ultimately reached by the Court of Appeals
concerning the waiver issue in the previous action to confirm the Partial Arbitration
Award, the issue of the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction and the propriety of the
anti-suit injunction was to be conclusively decided one way or the other in the action
to confirm the Partial Arbitration Award. With the jurisdictional and anti-suit
injunction issues thus decided, Consorcio’s withdrawal from the final evidentiary
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
20

hearing, the proceeding governing the issuance of the Final Award, in an attempt to
preserve its right to contest jurisdiction, was futile. Consorcio’s withdrawal was thus
ineffective to preserve its right to contest jurisdiction or the anti-suit injunction in the
appeal of the Partial Arbitration Award or in this action to confirm the Final Award.
Given that Consorcio’s withdrawal from the arbitration proceeding was unnecessary
to preserve its rights Consorcio was not precluded from or unable to present its case.
Even if Consorcio’s decision to withdraw from the proceeding was taken based on a
good faith subjective belief that such action was necessary to preserve its rights on
appeal, such a misgiving did not render Consorcio unable to present its case within
the meaning of Article V(1)(b). Therefore, Consorcio has not met its burden of
proving that Article V(1)(b) applies as a defense.”
27. Shri Banerji then referred to a judgment of the Supreme Court of Hong Kong, reported in
Nanjing Cereals v. Luckmate Commodities XXI Y.B. Com. Arb. 542 (1996). In paragraph 5 of the
judgment the court held:
“5. However, it appeared that the Defendants had had ample opportunity to present
their own evidence as to quantum to the Tribunal, but by their own admission they
had failed to do so. In addition, regarding the issue of whether I should exercise my
discretion in refusing in any case to set aside the Award, Mr. Chan conceded that the
fact that the final Award was lower than that claimed by the Plaintiffs was against his
clients. xxx xxx xxx
7.…At all events, the Defendants maintain that they did not submit their own figures
to the Tribunal, though this was clearly going to be an issue before the Tribunal, nor,
it appears, did they avail themselves of the opportunity to submit them later. That
decision was up to them. They must now live with its consequences.
8. Their omission was similar to that of the Defendants in another case, namely
Qinghuangdao Tongda Enterprise Development Co. v. Million Basic Co. Ltd.
[1993] 1 HKLR 173, where I held:-
"It is not accepted that the defendant had no opportunity to present its case. On the
contrary, the defendant made full use of the ample opportunity given and only
complained after the proceedings had finally been closed, having foregone the
opportunity of asking for an extension of those proceedings. All proceedings must
have a finite end."
9. In conclusion, I am not satisfied that the Defendants have made out sufficient grounds for me to
refuse leave to enforce the Award under S.44 of the Arbitration Ordinance. Even if they had made
out sufficient grounds, in my opinion this is a classic case where a court should exercise its
discretion to refuse to set aside an award, due to the failure of the Defendants to prosecute their own
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
21

case properly by submitting their own evidence to the Tribunal. The fact that the award was lower
than that sought by the Claimants is also a powerful factor against exercising discretion not to
enforce.” (emphasis supplied)
28. Shri Banerjee then referred to a judgment to the Supreme Court of Italy reported in De Maio
Giuseppe v. Interskins Y.B. Comm. Arb. XXVII (2002) 492. The Italian Supreme Court, in
considering the ground contained in Article V(1)(b) of the New York Convention held as follows:
“[5] "The first two grounds for appeal, which must be examined together since they
concern the same issues, are unfounded. Art. V(1)(b) of the New York Convention
provides that the failure to communicate either the arbitrator's appointment or the
arbitral proceedings, which makes it impossible to present one's case, is a ground for
refusing enforcement of the award. De Maio maintains that it was unable to present
its case because it was given only fourteen days to appoint an arbitrator. [6] "This
Court deems that there was no violation of due process as alleged by De Maio, and
that one or more missing pages on this issue in the Court of Appeal's decision do not
make this decision invalid. Since this is a procedural defect, we can settle the issue
directly, independent of whether the lower decision failed to give reasons on this
issue, the more so as we deal here exclusively with the interpretation and the
application of a procedural provision.
[7] "Art. V(1) provides that the party against whom the award is invoked has the
burden to prove the ground for refusal of enforcement under letter (b), as well as the
other grounds in that paragraph. Further, we must consider that, according to the
spirit of the Convention, the recognition of arbitral awards depends on specific
requirements which must be interpreted narrowly. [8] "Since in the present case it is
undisputed that Interskins informed De Maio that it had appointed an arbitrator, the
reasons given in the lower decision, which deems that this information and the time
limit [given to De Maio] guaranteed due process, suffice, independent of a failure to
give reasons on the objections raised by De Maio.
[9] "Second, we must consider that the ground for refusal under letter (b) concerns
the impossibility rather than the difficulty to present one's case. De Maio does not
argue and certainly does not prove that it could not present its case when the
arbitration was commenced or while it was held.”
29. We now come to the facts of the present case. Shri Raval’s plea that this Court cannot go into the
question posed before it as there was no difference of opinion on HCL being unable to present its
case, Justice Chatterjee J’s being the only judgment on this score, has no legs to stand. The reference
order that is extracted by us in paragraph 7 above, and that is contained in paragraph 1 of the
decision in Centrotrade [2017] (supra), makes it clear that, “in view of difference of opinion, the
matter is referred to a larger bench for reconsideration”. That the expression the matter was
understood as meaning the entire matter and not merely issue 1, is further made clear by paragraph
5 of the said judgment as follows:
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
22

“For the present, we propose to address only the first question and depending upon
the answer, the appeals would be set down for hearing on the remaining issue. We
have adopted this somewhat unusual course since the roster of business allowed us to
hear the appeals only sporadically and therefore the proceedings before us dragged
on for about three months.” Finally, the 3 Judge Bench concluded:
48. In view of the above, the first question before us is answered in the affirmative.
The appeals should be listed again for consideration of the second question which
relates to the enforcement of the appellate award.” In this view of the matter, we have
proceeded to examine the correctness of Chatterjee J’s views.
30. Shri Raval has argued that the London arbitrator ought to have determined the question of
jurisdiction as a preliminary question, as he himself had initially indicated, before going into the
substantive issues relating to the contract. We are afraid that this is an argument that has never
been raised earlier, and has been raised by Shri Raval here for the first time. Even otherwise, and
even if we were to go by the documents that were submitted to us for the first time by Shri Raval, the
fax sent on 20.12.2000 by the arbitrator to the parties is incomplete. Even otherwise, it speaks of
issues of jurisdiction and Indian law having to be addressed as a primary question before matters of
substance relating to the dispute on the contract. None of this clearly and unequivocally shows that
the learned arbitrator sought to take up the plea as to jurisdiction as a preliminary objection which
should be decided before other matters. This plea of Shri Raval, being taken here for the first time
and for the reasons given by us, is devoid of substance.
31. Shri Raval then argued that HCL was unable to present its case as the learned arbitrator did not
heed the stay order of the Rajasthan High Court dated 27.04.2000. First and foremost, the stay
order of the Rajasthan High Court was not and could not be directed against the arbitrator – it was
directed only against the parties to the proceeding. Secondly, the learned arbitrator initially began
the proceedings, after the green signal given to him by the ICC Court to proceed with the arbitration,
by directing that the appellant serve submissions along with supporting evidence, followed by the
respondent’s response and evidence on 19.01.2001. This, however, was reiterated only on
03.05.2001, by which time the Supreme Court had vacated the ad- interim ex parte order on
08.02.2001. This plea taken by Shri Raval, also taken before us for the first time, has no legs to
stand on.
32. Shri Raval then strenuously argued that considering that the last extension expired on
12.09.2001, the learned arbitrator ought to have taken onboard two other bundles of documents and
granted time for the same, given the terrorist attack in New York on 11.09.2001.
33. The sequence of events, even from the documents presented by Shri Raval for the first time, is
that legal submissions were furnished after 11.09.2001 and received by the arbitrator’s office on
13.09.2001. The arbitrator then stated that these submissions have been fully taken into account in
the award and that by 18.09.2001, there would be no scope for any further material being supplied,
as the publication of the award will follow shortly. This was communicated by fax on 18.09.2001 by
the learned arbitrator to Fox & Mandal, the Attorneys of HCL. It is only thereafter, on 19.09.2001,
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
23

that a couriered letter is sent to the learned arbitrator stating that Fox & Mandal would be deeply
obliged if documents contained in paper binder no.1 would also be taken into account. It was then
added that paper binder no.2, containing judgments of the Courts of law and authorities are being
sent separately and it may take 7 to 10 days’ more time beyond 19.09.2001.
34. At this stage, it is important to point out that the learned arbitrator had given a large number of
opportunities to file documents and legal submissions. On 03.05.2001 the learned arbitrator
directed that the appellant serve submissions along with supporting documents, following the
respondent’s response and evidence therein, with a right in the appellant to put in a reply, in
accordance with a clear time table that was set out. On 30.07.2001, since no defence submissions or
supporting evidence was served by the respondent within the time prescribed, the time was
extended, giving the respondent one last opportunity to put in their defence and to seek extension of
time for so doing. Until August 2001, it may be stated that respondent did not participate in the
arbitral proceedings, even though invited to do so. It is only on 09.08.2001, when the learned
arbitrator informed the parties that he is proceeding with the award, that on 11.08.2001, the learned
arbitrator received a fax from Fox & Mandal, Attorneys for HCL, requesting for an extension of one
month’s time to put in their defence. This was acceded to by the learned arbitrator on 16.08.2001,
giving time upto 31.08.2001. However, on 27.08.2001, Fox & Mandal sought for a further three
weeks’ extension of time, which was also granted by the learned arbitrator, allowing a final
extension of time until 12.09.2001. Despite the fact that the legal submissions running into 75 pages
were submitted beyond time, that is only on 13.9.2001, in view of the 11.09.2001 attack in New York,
the learned arbitrator received the same and took the same into account despite being beyond time.
It was only on 29.09.2001 that the learned arbitrator then passed his award. Given the aforesaid
timeline, it is clear that the learned arbitrator was extremely fair to the respondent. Having noticed
that the respondent wanted to stall the arbitral proceedings by approaching the Courts in Rajasthan
and having succeeded partially, at least till February 2001, the conduct of the respondent leaves
much to be called for. Despite being informed time and again to appear before the Tribunal and
submit their response and evidence in support thereof, it is only after the arbitrator indicated that
he was going to pass an award that the respondent’s attorneys woke up and started asking for time
to present their response. This too was granted by the learned arbitrator, by not only granting
extension of time, but by extending this time even further. Finally, when the legal submissions of 75
pages were sent even beyond the time that was granted, the learned Arbitrator took this into account
and then passed his award. This being the case, on facts we can find no fault whatsoever with the
conduct of the arbitral proceedings.
35. Justice Chatterjee, however, in his judgment, made several errors of fact. First and foremost, in
paragraph 166 of Centrotrade [2006] (supra), the learned Judge quoted the penultimate line in
paragraph 8 of the award, without even adverting to the line just before the aforesaid line which
indicated that the material that was received from HCL was in fact taken into consideration while
making the award, even beyond the stipulated time of 12.09.2001. Secondly, in paragraph 167,
Chatterjee,J. conjectured that between 13th and 29th September, 2001, the Arbitrator did receive
further material from HCL which he did not consider while making the award, on the ground that
they were received after the time limit granted by him to HCL. Factually, there is no supporting
material to show that any such further material was received by the learned arbitrator, except
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
24

documents that have been presented by Shri Raval for the first time before us. They were clearly not
before Chatterjee,J. when this surmise was made by the learned Judge, Further, the arbitrator
cannot be faulted on this ground as, given the authorities referred to by us hereinabove, the
arbitrator is in control of the arbitral proceedings and procedural orders which give time limits must
be strictly adhered to. In paragraph 168, the learned Judge then said that given the attack in New
York on 11.09.2001, the learned arbitrator should have excused further delay and should not have
acted on frivolous technicalities. This approach of a Court enforcing a foreign award flies in the face
of the judgments referred to by us hereinabove. Even otherwise, Chatterjee, J., refers to the
judgment in Hari Om Maheshwari (supra) as well as Minmetals (supra), but then does not proceed
to apply the ratio of the said judgments. Had he applied the ratio of even these two judgments, it
would have been clear that an arbitrator’s refusal to adjourn the proceedings at the behest of one
party cannot be said to be perverse, keeping in mind the object of speedy resolution of disputes of
the Arbitration Act. Further, the Minmetals (supra) test was not even adverted to by Chatterjee,J.,
which is that HCL was never unable to present its case as it was at no time outside its control to
furnish documents and legal submissions within the time given by the learned arbitrator. HCL chose
not to appear before the arbitrator, and thereafter chose to submit documents and legal submissions
outside the timelines granted by the arbitrator.
36. Even otherwise, remanding the matter to the ICC arbitrator to pass a fresh award in paragraph
169, is clearly outside the jurisdiction of an enforcing court under Section 48 of the 1996 Act.
37. For all these reasons, it is clear that Chatterjee, J.’s judgment cannot be sustained. As a result,
Centrotrade’s appeal, being Civil Appeal No. 2562 of 2006, is allowed. The judgment of Chatterjee,J
is set aside. HCL’s appeal, being Civil Appeal No. 2564 of 2006, is dismissed. Resultantly, the
foreign award, dated 29.09.2001, shall now be enforced.
….……………………………J. (R.F. Nariman) ….……………………………J. (S. Ravindra Bhat)
….……………………………J. (V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN) New Delhi;
June 02, 2020.
M/S. Centrotrade Minerals And Metals ... vs Hindustan Copper Ltd. on 2 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90056159/
25
