M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of
Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1189, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
258
Author: Chief Justice
Bench: Surya Kant, B.R. Gavai, S.A. Bobde
                                                             1
                                                                                       R
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5437-5438/2012
                         M/S. ANANDA SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL TRUST                 ……..AP
                                                           VERSUS
                         THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX & ANR.                   ……..RES
                         WITH
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.4702/2014
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.1727/2020 (@SLP(C) NO.25761/2015)
                                                         O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).5437-5438/2012 We have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties
and perused the impugned Judgment(s) and Order(s) passed by the High Court of Karnataka.
In our considered view, the reasons assigned by the High Court in passing the impugned
judgment(s) and order(s) need no interference as the same are in consonance with law.
Accordingly, there is no merit in these appeals and they are dismissed.
M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196693316/
1

This appeal has been preferred by the appellant - Director of Income Tax against the impugned
judgment and order passed by the Delhi High Court holding that a newly registered Trust is entitled
for registration under section 12AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, the ‘Act’) on the basis of
its objects, without any activity having been undertaken. Section 12AA of the Act reads as follows :
“12AA. Procedure for registration. - (1) The [Principal Commissioner or]
Commissioner, on receipt of an application for registration of a trust or institution
made under clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (ab) of sub-section (1) of section 12A,
shall-
(a) call for such documents or information from the trust or institution as he thinks
necessary in order to satisfy himself about the genuineness of activities of the trust or
institution and may also make such inquiries as he may deem necessary in this
behalf; and
(b) after satisfying himself about the objects of the trust or institution and the
genuineness of its activities, he-
(i) shall pass an order in writing registering the trust or institution;
(ii) shall, if he is not so satisfied, pass an order in writing refusing to register the trust
or institution, and a copy of such order shall be sent to the applicant :
Provided that no order under sub-clause (ii) shall be passed unless the applicant has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (1A) All applications, pending
before the [Principal Chief Commissioner or] Chief Commissioner on which no order
has been passed under clause (b) of sub-section (1) before the 1st day of June, 1999,
shall stand transferred on that day to the [Principal Commissioner or] Commissioner
and the [Principal Commissioner or] Commissioner may proceed with such
applications under that sub-
section from the stage at which they were on that day.
(2) Every order granting or refusing registration under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be passed
before the expiry of six months from the end of the month in which the application was received
under clause (a) or clause (aa) or clause (ab) of sub- section (1) of section 12A.
(3) Where a trust or an institution has been granted registration under clause (b) of sub- section (1)
or has obtained registration at any time under section 12A [as it stood before its amendment by the
Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)] and subsequently the [Principal Commissioner or]
Commissioner is satisfied that the activities of such trust or institution are not genuine or are not
being carried out in accordance with the objects of the trust or institution, as the case may be, he
shall pass an order in writing cancelling the registration of such trust or institution:
M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196693316/
2

Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be passed unless such trust or
institution has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. [(4) Without
prejudice to the provisions of sub- section (3), where a trust or an institution has
been granted registration under clause (b) of sub- section (1) or has obtained
registration at any time under section 12A [as it stood before its amendment by the
Finance (No. 2) Act, 1996 (33 of 1996)] and subsequently it is noticed that the
activities of the trust or the institution are being carried out in a manner that the
provisions of sections 11 and 12 do not apply to exclude either whole or any part of
the income of such trust or institution due to operation of sub-
section (1) of section 13, then, the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner may by an order in
writing cancel the registration of such trust or institution:
Provided that the registration shall not be cancelled under this sub-section, if the
trust or institution proves that there was a reasonable cause for the activities to be
carried out in the said manner.] The above section provides for registration of a trust.
Such registration can be applied for by a trust which has been in existence for some
time and also by a newly registered trust. There is no stipulation that the trust should
have already been in existence and should have undertaken any activities before
making the application for registration.
In brief, section 12AA of the Act empowers the Principal Commissioner or the
Commissioner of the Income Tax on receipt of an application for registration of a
trust to call for such documents as may be necessary to satisfy himself about the
genuineness of activities of the trust or institution and make inquiries in that behalf;
it empowers the Commissioner to thereupon register the trust if he is satisfied about
the objects of the trust or institution and genuineness of its activities.
In the present case, the trust was formed as a society on 30.05.2008 and it applied
for registration on 10.07.2008 i.e. within a period of about two months.
No activities had been undertaken by the respondent Trust before the application was made. The
Commissioner rejected the application on the sole ground that since no activities have been
undertaken by the trust, it was not possible to register it, presumably because it was not possible to
be satisfied about whether the activities of the trust are genuine. The Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Delhi (for short, the ‘Tribunal’) reversed the orders of the Commissioner. The Revenue
Department approached the High Court by way of filing an appeal. The High Court upheld the order
of the Tribunal and came to the conclusion that in case of a newly registered trust even though there
was no activities, it was possible to consider whether the trust can be registered under section 12AA
of the Act. This judgment is assailed before us.
Section 12AA undoubtedly requires the Commissioner to satisfy himself about the objects of the
trust or institution and genuineness of its activities and grant a registration only if he is so satisfied.
The said section requires the Commissioner to be so satisfied in order to ensure that the object of
M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196693316/
3

the trust and its activities are charitable since the consequence of such registration is that the trust is
entitled to claim benefits under sections 11 and 12 of the Act. In other words, if it appears that the
objects of the trust and its activities are not genuine that is to say not charitable the Commissioner is
entitled to refuse and in fact, bound to refuse such registration.
It was argued before us that the Commissioner is required to be satisfied about two things – firstly
that the objects of the trust and secondly, its activities are genuine. If there have been no activities
undertaken by the trust then the Commissioner cannot assess whether such activities are genuine
and therefore, the Commissioner is bound to refuse the registration of such a trust.
We have given our anxious consideration to the above submissions made by Ms. Aishwarya Bhati,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant – Director of Income Tax and find that it is not
possible to agree with the same. The purpose of section 12AA of the Act is to enable registration only
of such trust or institution whose objects and activities are genuine. In other words, the
Commissioner is bound to satisfy himself that the object of the Trust are genuine and that its
activities are in furtherance of the objects of the Trust, that is equally genuine.
Since section 12AA pertains to the registration of the Trust and not to assess of what a trust has
actually done, we are of the view that the term ‘activities’ in the provision includes ‘proposed
activities’. That is to say, a Commissioner is bound to consider whether the objects of the Trust are
genuinely charitable in nature and whether the activities which the Trust proposed to carry on are
genuine in the sense that they are in line with the objects of the Trust. In contrast, the position
would be different where the Commissioner proposes to cancel the registration of a Trust under
sub-section (3) of section 12AA of the Act. There the Commissioner would be bound to record the
finding that an activity or activities actually carried on by the Trust are not genuine being not in
accordance with the objects of the Trust. Similarly, the situation would be different where the trust
has before applying for registration found to have undertaken activities contrary to the objects of the
Trust.
We therefore find that the view of the Delhi High Court in the impugned judgment is correct and
liable to be upheld.
Ms. Bhati, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, fairly drew our attention to a judgment of the
Allahabad High Court in IT Appeal No.36 of 2013 titled as “Commissioner of Income Tax-II vs. R.S.
Bajaj Society” which has taken the same view as that of the Delhi High Court in the impugned
judgment. The Allahabad High Court has also referred to a similar view taken by the High Courts of
Karnataka and Punjab & Haryana.
Apparently, a contrary view has been taken by the Kerala High Court in the case of Self Employers
Service Society vs. Commissioner of Income Tax – (2001) Vol.247 ITR 18. That view however does
not commend itself. However, the facts in Self Employers Service Society (Supra) suggest that the
Commissioner of Income Tax had observed that the applicant for registration as a Trust had
undertaken activities which were contrary to the objects of the Trust.
M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196693316/
4

In the result, we find that there is no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment of the High
Court of Delhi. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. CIVIL APPEAL NO.1727/2020 (@SLP(C)
NO.25761/2015) Leave granted.
In this case, the Trust which applied for registration under section 12AA of the Income Tax Act,
1961, was found not to have spent any part of its income on charitable activities. The Commissioner
of Income Tax, therefore, refused the registration of Trust.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal reversed the decision of the Commissioner of income Tax on the
basis of the judgment of the Delhi High Court in matters referred to above.
For the reasons stated earlier, we are of the view that the object of the provision in question is to
ensure that the activities undertaken by the Trust are not contrary to its objects and that a
Commissioner is entitled to refuse registration if the activities are found contrary to the objects of
the Trust.
In the present case, what has been found is that the Trust had not spent any amount of its income
for charitable purposes. This is a case of not carrying out the objects of the Trust and not carrying on
activities contrary to its object. These circumstances may arise for many reasons including not
finding suitable circumstances for carrying on activities. Undoubtedly the inaction in carrying out
charitable purposes might also become actionable depending on other circumstances; but we are not
concerned with such a case here.
In these circumstances, we leave it upon the Commissioner of Income Tax to consider the issue by
exercising his powers under sub-section (3) of section 12AA, if the facts justify such actions.
The appeal is, however, dismissed.
....................CJI [S.A. BOBDE] .....................J [B.R. GAVAI] .....................J [SURYA KANT] NEW
DELHI;
FEBRUARY 19, 2020.
M/S. Ananda Social And Educational ... vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax on 19 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196693316/
5
