M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of
Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: Arun Mishra, Vineet Saran, M.R. Shah
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2006-2007 OF 2020
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 8449-50/2017)
         M/S SUPER MALLS PRIVATE LIMITED                                  …APPELLANT
                                           VERSUS
         PRINCIPAL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME
         TAX 8, NEW DELHI                                                 …RESPONDENT
                                                 WITH
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2008-2009 OF 2020
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 8453-54/2017)
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2010-2011 OF 2020
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 8451-52/2017)
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2012-2013 OF 2020
                                     (Arising out of SLP(C) Nos. 8455-56/2017)
                                                 JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
As common question of law and facts arise in this group of appeals, and are with respect to common
assessee, but with respect to different assessment years, all these appeals are being decided together
by this common Judgment and Order.
2. For the sake of convenience, the facts of Civil Appeals arising from Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.
8449-8450/2017 arising from I.T.A. No. 453/2016 & Review Petition No. 16/2017 for Assessment
Year 2008-09 are stated and considered. The facts in nutshell are as under:
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
1

2.1 By virtue of the authorization of the Director of Income Tax (Investigation),
Chandigarh, a search and seizure operation under Section 132(1) of the Income Tax
Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’) was carried out on 8/9.04.2010 at the
residential/business premises of Shri Tejwant Singh and Shri Ved Prakash Bharti
group of companies at Karnal, Panipat and Delhi. A survey under Section 133A of the
Act was also carried out at the business premises of M/s Super Mall (P) Limited – the
assessee, at Karnal and New Delhi. That during the course of the search on
8/9.04.2010 at the residence of Shri Ved Prakash Bharti, a Director in the assessee
company – M/s Super Mall (P) Limited, pen drive was found and seized from the
vehicle parked in front of Shri Ved Prakash Bharti’s residence. That some documents
were seized after taking out the print from the above said pen drive. The said
documents contained the details of the cash receipts on sale of shops/offices at M/s
Super Mall, Karnal, also besides other concerns. That as a consequence of the
aforesaid search and seizure operation, a notice was issued to the assessee – M/s
Super Mall (P) Limited (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Assessee’) under Section 153C
of the Act by the Assessing Officer. At this stage, it is required to be noted that
co-incidentally it so happened that the Assessing Officer of the assessee and the
Assessing Officer of the search persons – Tejwant Singh and Ved Prakash Bharti was
the same. The assessee filed its return for the assessment year 2008-09. The
assessment for the assessment year 2008-09 was finalised by the Assessing Officer
and additions were made in the assessment year 2008-09. The assessment order was
the subject matter of appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). The
assessment order was challenged mainly on the ground that the satisfaction note
recorded under Section 153C of the Act in respect of the assessee, i.e., a third party,
was invalid. That the learned CIT (Appeals) dismissed the assessee’s appeal.
However, the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short ‘ITAT’) allowed the appeal preferred
by the assessee and held that the satisfaction note recorded under Section 153C of the Act in respect
of the assessee, i.e., a third party, was invalid. In the appeal before the High Court, by the impugned
Judgment and Order, the High Court has allowed the said appeal preferred by the Revenue and has
observed and held that there was a compliance of Section 153C of the Act. The High Court also
observed that the Assessing Officer was justified in recording the satisfaction that the documents so
seized “belonged” to the assessee. Consequently, the High Court has set aside the order passed by
the learned ITAT and remanded the matter to the learned ITAT to hear the appeals afresh on merits.
At this stage, it is required to be noted that the learned ITAT set aside the order passed by the
learned CIT(Appeals) solely on the satisfaction note being invalid and did not enter into the merits.
Therefore, the High Court set aside the learned ITAT’s decision with respect to satisfaction note
recorded by the Assessing Officer under Section 153C of the Act. Hence, the present appeal.
2.2 Therefore, the short question which is posed for the consideration of this Court is with respect to
the satisfaction note recorded by the Assessing Officer, as required under Section 153C of the Act.
3. Shri R.P. Bhatt, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the assessee has made the
following submissions:
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
2

3.1 That in the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has materially
erred in observing and holding that the Assessing Officer has complied with the
provisions of Section 153C of the Act; 3.2 That in the present case there was no
satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer of the searched party. That as per the
scheme of Section 153C of the Act, the Assessing Officer of searched person, i.e., the
Directors in this case has to be firstly “satisfied” that any money, jewellery or other
valuable articles, books of accounts or documents seized or requisitioned “belong to”,
i.e., in this case, the assessee company, a person other than the person referred to
under Section 153A of the Act. It is submitted that thereafter and on being satisfied
that the books of accounts or documents or assets so seized or requisitioned shall be
handed over by the Assessing Officer of searched person, i.e., the Directors in this
case to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person i.e., the
assessee company. That the aforesaid requirements before issuing notice under
Section 153C of the Act are held to be mandatory by this Court in catena of decisions.
Reliance is placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of Commissioner of
Income Tax v. Calcutta Knitwears (2014) 6 SCC 444; decision of the Delhi High Court
in the case of Pepsi Food Pvt. Ltd. v.
Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax 2014 (367) ITR 112 (Delhi); decision of the Gujarat High
Court in the case of Commissioner of Incoem Tax v. Bipinchandra Chimanlal Doshi 2017 (395) ITR
632 (Gujarat); and the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Ganpati Fincap Service Pvt.
Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax 2017 (395) ITR 692 (Delhi);
3.3 That even the CBDT also issued a Circular explaining the requirements to be followed by the
Assessing Officer before issuing notice under Section 153C of the Act. That the said Circular has
been referred to and considered by the Delhi High Court in the case of Ganpati Fincap (supra) and
after considering the various decisions of different High Courts, it is observed that when
proceedings are proposed to be initiated under Section 153C of the Act against the “other person”, it
has to be preceded by a satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer of the searched person. It is further
observed that he will record in his satisfaction note that the seized documents belong to “other
person”. That in the present case there was no satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer of the
searched person. That there is a non-compliance of the provisions of Section 153C of the Act as well
as even the Circular issued by the CBDT and therefore the learned ITAT rightly set aside the
assessment order.
3.4 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions, it is prayed to allow the
present appeals.
4. Shri Arijit Prasad, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the Revenue, while opposing
the present appeal/s has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case and
after considering the satisfaction note recorded by the Assessing Officer, the High Court has rightly
observed and held that there is a sufficient compliance of Section 153C of the Act. In support he has
made the following submissions:
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
3

4.1 That in the present case, the Assessing Officer of the assessee and the Assessing
Officer of the searched person was the same and therefore if one looks at the
satisfaction note, it can be seen that there is a satisfaction note by the Assessing
Officer of the searched person also. It is submitted that as the Assessing Officer was
the same, there was no question of thereafter transmitting the documents so seized
from the searched person to another Assessing Officer as he himself was the
Assessing Officer of the searched person as well as the Assessing Officer of the
assessee. Therefore, there was a sufficient compliance of the requirements under
Section 153C of the Act.
4.2 That even as observed and held by the Delhi High Court in the case of Ganpati
Fincap (supra), in case the Assessing Officer of the searched person and the other
person is the same, there need not be two separate satisfaction notes recorded by the
Assessing Officer of the searched person, where he is also the Assessing Officer of the
other person.
4.3 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decision, it is
prayed to dismiss the present appeals.
5. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.
5.1 As observed hereinabove, the short question which is posed for the consideration of this Court is,
whether there is a compliance of the provisions of Section 153C of the Act by the Assessing Officer
and all the conditions which are required to be fulfilled before initiating the proceedings under
Section 153C of the Act have been satisfied or not?
6. This Court had an occasion to consider the scheme of Section 153C of the Act and the conditions
precedent to be fulfilled/complied with before issuing notice under Section 153C of the Act in the
case of Calcutta Knitwears (supra) as well as by the Delhi High Court in the case of Pepsi Food Pvt.
Ltd. (supra). As held, before issuing notice under Section 153C of the Act, the Assessing Officer of
the searched person must be “satisfied” that, inter alia, any document seized or requisitioned
“belongs to” a person other than the searched person. That thereafter, after recording such
satisfaction by the Assessing Officer of the searched person, he may transmit the
records/documents/things/papers etc. to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other
person. After receipt of the aforesaid satisfaction and upon examination of such other documents
relating to such other person, the jurisdictional Assessing Officer may proceed to issue a notice for
the purpose of completion of the assessment under Section 158BD of the Act and the other
provisions of Chapter XIV-B shall apply. 6.1 It cannot be disputed that the aforesaid requirements
are held to be mandatorily complied with. There can be two eventualities. It may so happen that the
Assessing Officer of the searched person is different from the Assessing Officer of the other person
and in the second eventuality, the Assessing Officer of the searched person and the other person is
the same. Where the Assessing Officer of the searched person is different from the Assessing Officer
of the other person, there shall be a satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer of the searched person
and as observed hereinabove that thereafter the Assessing Officer of the searched person is required
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
4

to transmit the documents so seized to the Assessing Officer of the other person. The Assessing
Officer of the searched person simultaneously while transmitting the documents shall forward his
satisfaction note to the Assessing Officer of the other person and is also required to make a note in
the file of a searched person that he has done so. However, as rightly observed and held by the Delhi
High Court in the case of Ganpati Fincap (supra), the same is for the administrative convenience
and the failure by the Assessing Officer of the searched person, after preparing and dispatching the
satisfaction note and the documents to the Assessing Officer of the other person, to make a note in
the file of a searched person, will not vitiate the entire proceedings under Section 153C of the Act
against the other person. At the same time, the satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer of the
searched person that the documents etc. so seized during the search and seizure from the searched
person belonged to the other person and transmitting such material to the Assessing Officer of the
other person is mandatory. However, in the case where the Assessing Officer of the searched person
and the other person is the same, it is sufficient by the Assessing Officer to note in the satisfaction
note that the documents seized from the searched person belonged to the other person. Once the
note says so, then the requirement of Section 153C of the Act is fulfilled. In case, where the
Assessing Officer of the searched person and the other person is the same, there can be one
satisfaction note prepared by the Assessing Officer, as he himself is the Assessing Officer of the
searched person and also the Assessing Officer of the other person. However, as observed
hereinabove, he must be conscious and satisfied that the documents seized/recovered from the
searched person belonged to the other person. In such a situation, the satisfaction note would be
qua the other person. The second requirement of transmitting the documents so seized from the
searched person would not be there as he himself will be the Assessing Officer of the searched
person and the other person and therefore there is no question of transmitting such seized
documents to himself.
6.2. Now let us consider from the satisfaction note recorded by the Assessing Officer, in the present
case. Whether there is a sufficient compliance of Section 153C of the Act or not. The satisfaction note
reads as under:
“Name and address of the assessee : M/s Super Malls (P) Ltd.
Sector 12, HUDA, Karnal Regd. Office at 51, Transport Centre Punjabi Bagh, New
Delhi.
PAN                      :     AAICS2163F
Status                   :     Company
Reasons/Satisfaction note for taking up the case of M/s Super Malls (P) Ltd.
Sector-12, HUDA, Karnal Regd. Office at 51, Transport Centre, Punjabi Bagh, New
Delhi under Section 153C of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The jurisdiction of this case has been assigned to this Office u/s 127 of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 by the worthy Commissioner of Income Tax-III New Delhi vide order F.
No. CITIII/Delhi/Centralization/1012-1312455 dated 15.01.2013.
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
5

By virtue of the authorization of the Director of Income Tax (Investigation), Chandigarh, a search &
seizure operation u/s 132(1) of the Act was carried out on 08/09.04.2010 at the residential/business
premises of Sh. Tejwant Singh & Sh. Ved Parkash Bharti Group of cases, Karnal, Panipat & Delhi
and a survey u/s 133A of the IT. Act, 1961 was also carried out at the business premises of M/s Super
Mall (P) Ltd. Karnal & New Delhi. During the course of search on 08/09.04.2010 at residence of Sh.
Ved Parkash Bharti who is a Director in the assessee company M/s Super Mall (P) Ltd., Pen drives
were found and seized as per Annexure-3 from vehicle No. HR06N-0063 parked in front of the
residence of Sh. Ved Parkash Bharti. Some documents as per Annexure A-1 were seized after taking
print out of the above said pen drives. These documents contain the details of cash receipt on sale of
shop/offices at M/s Super Mall, Karnal also beside other concerns. These documents are required
for assessment proceedings. During the statement of Sh. Ved Parkash Bharti at the time of search,
he has also stated that these documents pertain to him and M/s Super Mall (P) Ltd., Karnal in which
he is Director. In view of the above and as per the provisions of sub-section 91 of Section 153C of the
Act, I am satisfied that the document seized from the residence of Sh. Ved Parkash Bharti belongs to
a person i.e. Super Mall (P) Ltd., other than the person referred in section 153A. Accordingly, it is
directed to issue such person (M/s Super Mall (P) Ltd.) notice and assess and reassess income in
accordance with the provision of section 153A of the Act.
      Dated: 22.02.2013                             sd/-
                                             (VED PARKASH KALIA)”
From the aforesaid satisfaction note, it emerges that the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the
documents containing the details of the cash receipts on sale of shop/offices at M/s Super Mall,
Karnal belonged to the other person – assessee – M/s Super Mall. He is also satisfied that the
documents/pen drive are seized from the searched person. He is also satisfied that the documents so
seized from the residence of the searched person/Ved Prakash Bharti belonged to the assessee – the
other person. Therefore, the Assessing Officer was satisfied and it is specifically mentioned that the
documents so seized belonged to the assessee – the other person. Therefore, it cannot be said that
the mandatory requirements of Section 153C of the Act, in the facts and circumstances of the case,
have not been complied with. The satisfaction note by the Assessing Officer clearly states that the
documents so seized belonged to the other person – the assessee and not the searched person. Thus,
the High Court is justified in observing that the requirement of Section 153C has been fulfilled. On
facts, we are in complete agreement with the view taken by the High Court on the requirement of
Section 153C of the Act being fulfilled by the Assessing Officer before initiating the proceedings
under Section 153C of the Act.
7. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, all these APPEALS fail and the same
deserve to be dismissed and are accordingly dismissed. Now, the learned ITAT shall decide and
dispose of the appeals afresh on merits, at the earliest, in accordance with law, as observed by the
High Court in the impugned Judgment(s) and Order(s).
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
6

                                      ……………………………………J.
                                      [ASHOK BHUSHAN]
NEW DELHI;                            ……………………………………J.
MARCH 05, 2020.                       [M.R. SHAH]
M/S. Super Malls Private Limited. vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax 8 on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48932923/
7
