Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 917
Author: L. Nageswara Rao
Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Hemant Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                        Reportable
           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
       CIVIL ORIGINAL/APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              Writ Petition (C) No.804 of 2020
MADRAS BAR ASSOCIATION
                                                        ...Petitioner
                            Versus
UNION OF INDIA & ANR.
                                                   ...Respondents
                             WITH
              Misc. Application No.1058 of 2020
                              In
               Writ Petition (C) No.640 of 2017
              Misc. Application No.1152 of 2020
                               In
               Writ Petition (C) No. 279 of 2017
               Writ Petition (C) No. 867 of 2020
               Writ Petition (C) No.1431 of 2019
           Transfer Petition (C) Nos. 905-915 of 2020
              Civil Appeal Nos.3505-3506 of 2020
              (@ SLP (C) Nos. 9587-9588 of 2020)
          Transfer Petition (C) No. 1356-1360 of 2020
                ( @ Diary No. 18900 of 2020 )
              Misc. Application No.1481 of 2020
                              In
               Writ Petition (C) No.279 of 2017
                Writ Petition (C) No.995 of 2020
                Writ Petition (C) No.991 of 2020
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
1

                                                            1|Page
                 Misc. Application No.1654 of 2020
                                 In
                  Writ Petition (C) No.279 of 2017
                  Writ Petition (C) No.1085 of 2020
                 Misc. Application No.1811 of 2020
                                 In
                  Writ Petition (C) No.279 of 2017
                    Civil Appeal No.3598 of 2020
                    (@ SLP (C) No.11612 of 2020)
                       JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
1. This Court is once again, within the span of a year, called upon to decide the constitutionality of
various provisions concerning the selection, appointment, tenure, conditions of service, and
ancillary matters relating to various tribunals, 19 in number, which act in aid of the judicial branch.
That the judicial system and this Court in particular has to live these déjà vu moments, time and
again (exemplified by no less than four constitution bench judgments) in the last 8 years, speaks
profound volumes about the constancy of other branches of governance, in their insistence
regarding these issues. At the heart of this, however, are stakes far greater: the
2|Page guarantee of the rule of law to each citizen of the country, with the concomitant guarantee of
equal protection of the law. This judgment is to be read as a sequel, and together with the decision of
the Constitution Bench in Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Limited1.
2. The core controversy arising for this Court’s consideration is the constitutional validity of the
“Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other Authorities [Qualification, Experience and Other
Conditions of Service of Members] Rules, 2020” (hereinafter referred to as “the 2020 Rules”).
3. Before considering the merits of the case, it is necessary to refer to the events preceding the
issuance of the 2020 Rules for a better understanding of the dispute. Like many other nations, India
recognized the need for Tribunalisation of justice to provide for adjudication by persons with ability
to decide disputes in specific fields as well as to provide expedited justice in certain kinds of cases.
Part XIV-A was inserted in the Constitution of India by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act,
1976. Article 323-A enables the Parliament to constitute administrative tribunals for adjudication of
the disputes relating to the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public
posts in connection with the affairs of 1 (2020) 6 SCC 1
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
2

3|Page the Union or of any State or any local or other authority. According to Article 323-B, the
appropriate Legislature may constitute Tribunals for adjudication of any dispute, complaints, or
other offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in Clause (2) therein. The vires of
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (enacted by Parliament in furtherance of Article 323A, for
setting up administrative tribunals for adjudication of service disputes of public servants) was
challenged in proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. Two questions that were
posed in the said Writ Petition related to the exclusion of jurisdiction of the High Court under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution in service matters, the composition of the administrative
Tribunal and the mode of appointment of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members. While holding
that the bar on jurisdiction of the High Courts’ cannot be a ground of attack, this Court in S.P.
Sampath Kumar v. Union of India2 held that the Tribunal “should be a real substitute of the High
Courts not only in form and de jure but in content and de facto”. The Central Government was
directed to make modifications to the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 pertaining to the
composition of 2 (1987) 1 SCC 124
4|Page the Tribunal to ensure selection of proper and competent people to the posts of Presiding
Officers of the Tribunal.
4. The judgment in S.P. Sampath Kumar (supra) was referred to a larger Bench for re-consideration
in view of later rulings, notably R.K. Jain v. Union of India3 which had called for a review with
respect to functioning of tribunals. In L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India,4 this Court held that the
power of judicial review vested in the High Courts and this Court under Articles 226 and 227, and 32
is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Therefore, the Court held that the Tribunals
cannot act as substitutes of the High Courts and this Court, and that their functioning is only
supplementary and that all decisions of administrative Tribunals will be subject to scrutiny before a
Division Bench of the respective High Courts. Addressing the issue of the dependence of tribunals
on the Executive for administrative requirements, a recommendation was made for creation of a
single umbrella organisation which will be an independent supervisory body to oversee the working
of the Tribunals. This Court was also of the opinion that the Ministry of Law and Justice,
Government of India should be the nodal Ministry. 3 [1993] 4 SCC 119 4 (1997) 3 SCC 261
5|Page
5. Part I-B and Part I-C were inserted in the Companies Act, 1956 providing for the constitution of
the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
(NCLAT). Madras Bar Association filed a Writ Petition in the Madras High Court challenging the
vires of the above provisions on the grounds of violation of rule of law, doctrine of separation of
powers and the independence of the judiciary, which are essential features of the basic structure of
the Constitution. The Madras High Court allowed the Writ Petition, which was subject matter of
several appeals which were disposed of by this Court in Union of India v. R. Gandhi, President,
Madras Bar Association5. This Court was of the opinion that while it cannot be said that the
Legislature is denuded the power to transfer judicial functions performed by courts to Tribunals,
nevertheless independent judicial Tribunals for determination of the rights of citizens, and for
adjudication of the disputes and complaints of the citizens, is a necessary concomitant of the rule of
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
3

law. It was held in the above judgment that judicial independence and separation of judicial power
from the executive, are part of common law traditions implicit in a Constitution like ours. The
creation of the NCLT and NCLAT was upheld. However, the defects found in Parts 5 (2010) 11 SCC 1
6|Page I-B and I-C of the Companies Act, 1956 were directed to be rectified by suitable amendments
with modifications suggested by this Court in order to uphold the judicial independence of the
Tribunals. The suggestions pertained to composition of the Search-cum-Selection Committee (for
appointment of members of the tribunals), qualifications for appointment, and service conditions of
members of the Tribunals. Later, Madras Bar Association had assailed the constitutional validity of
the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005. This Court held the National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 to be
unconstitutional.6 Nonetheless, the vesting of adjudicatory functions in Tribunals was held to be not
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution. The Companies Act, 2013 replaced the earlier Act
of 1956 in which amendments were made to provisions relating to the establishment of NCLT and
NCLAT. A Writ Petition was filed under Article 32 by the Madras Bar Association questioning the
amended provisions of Chapter XXVII of the Companies Act, 2013, and more particularly Sections
408, 409, 411(3), 412, 413, 425, 431 and 434. The complaint of the Madras Bar Association in the
said Writ Petition was that the offending provisions were analogous to the provisions in the 1956 Act
which were found to be unconstitutional by this Court in 6 Madras Bar Association v. Union of
India, (2014) 10 SCC 1.
7|Page Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra). The constitutional validity of the
provisions in Chapter XXVII of the Companies Act, 2013 was upheld by a judgment in Madras Bar
Association v. Union of India7. However, this Court was of the view that certain provisions relating
to composition of the Search-cum- Selection Committee and qualification of Members of the
Tribunals are invalid as they are contrary to the directions issued by the earlier judgment in Union
of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra).
6. By the Finance Act, 2017, amendments were made to certain Acts to provide for merger of
Tribunals and other authorities, and conditions of service of Chairpersons, Members, etc. According
to Section 183 of the Finance Act, 2017, the provisions of Section 184 shall apply to the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice- Chairman, President, Vice-President, Presiding Officer or
Member of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal or other authorities, as specified under Column (2) of
the Eighth Schedule to the Finance Act, 2017 on and from the appointed day i.e. 26.05.2017. It was
further provided that Section 184 shall not apply to those holding such office immediately before the
appointed day. Section 184 7 (2015) 8 SCC 583
8|Page empowered the Central Government to make rules to provide for qualifications,
appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President,
Presiding Officer, Vice-President, or Member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal or other
authorities as specified in Column (2) of the Eighth Schedule to the 2020 Rules. Maximum tenure of
the aforementioned persons was fixed as five years. Chairperson, Chairman or Presiding Officer of
the Tribunals cannot continue beyond 70 years. Likewise, the Vice-Chairperson, Vice- Chairman,
Vice-President, Presiding Officer or any other Member shall be entitled to continue till they attain
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
4

the age of 67 years. The validity of the Finance Act, 2017 and the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and
other Authorities (Qualification, Experience and Other Conditions of Service of Members) Rules,
2017 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2017 Rules”) came up for consideration before this Court in
Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Limited8. This Court formulated the following issues for
consideration:
“86.1. (I.) Whether the “Finance Act, 2017” insofar as it amends certain other
enactments and alters conditions of service of
8 (2020) 6 SCC 1
9|Page persons manning different Tribunals can be termed as a “Money Bill” under Article 110 and
consequently is validly enacted? 86.2. (II.) If the answer to the above is in the affirmative then
whether Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 is unconstitutional on account of excessive
delegation?” 86.3 III. If Section 184 is valid, Whether Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal and other
Authorities (Qualifications, Experience and other Conditions of Service of Members) Rules, 2017 are
in consonance with the Principal Act and various decisions of this Court on functioning of
Tribunals?
86.4 IV. Whether there should be a Single Nodal Agency for administration of all Tribunals?
86.5 V. Whether there is a need for conducting a Judicial Impact Assessment of all Tribunals in
India?
86.6 VI. Whether judges of Tribunals set up by Acts of Parliament under Articles 323-A and 323-B
of the Constitution can be equated in ‘rank’ and ‘status’ with Constitutional functionaries? 86.7 VII.
Whether direct statutory appeals from Tribunals to the Supreme Court ought to be detoured?
86.8 VIII. Whether there is a need for amalgamation of existing Tribunals and setting up of
benches.” 10 | P a g e
7. The issue pertaining to whether the Finance Act, 2017 was a “Money Bill” (and if not, the need for
it to be passed by the Rajya Sabha) was referred to a larger Bench and it was held that Section 184 of
the Finance Act, 2017 does not suffer from excessive delegation of legislative functions. The 2017
Rules were struck down as being contrary to the principles of the Constitution as interpreted by
various decisions of this Court (including those previously referred to herein). The Central
Government was directed to re- formulate the Rules strictly in conformity and in accordance with
the principles delineated by this Court in its earlier judgments read with the observations made in
the judgment in Rojer Mathew (supra). Non-discriminatory and uniform conditions of service
including assured tenure were directed to be formulated by the Central Government in the new set
of Rules. A Writ of Mandamus was issued to the Ministry of Law & Justice to carry out a judicial
impact assessment for all the Tribunals. Appointments to the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and the
other Authorities were directed to be held in accordance with the respective statutes which governed
the conditions of service of members of Tribunals before the enactment of the Finance Act, 2017 till
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
5

a fresh set of Rules were made by the 11 | P a g e Central Government. The Union of India was
granted liberty to seek modification of the said order after fresh Rules are framed.
8. Thereafter, by a Notification dated 12.02.2020, the Central Government in exercise of the power
conferred by Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 made the impugned 2020 Rules. The 2020 Rules
which deal with the qualification and appointment of members by recruitment, procedure for
inquiry into misbehavior, House Rent Allowance and other Conditions of Service are the subject
matter of challenge in these cases before us and will be dealt with in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
9. Pursuant to the liberty granted by this Court in the judgment of Rojer Mathew (supra), the Union
of India filed Miscellaneous Application No.1152 of 2020 placing the 2020 Rules before this Court
and seeking a direction that the 2020 Rules would apply to all persons appointed as Members,
President, Chairperson, etc. of Tribunals after the appointed day i.e. 26.05.2017. Several
applications were filed by Bar Associations and the Members of the Tribunals seeking directions to
fill up the vacant posts by making appointments to the Tribunals and for clarifications relating to
the retrospective operation of the 2020 Rules. The Madras Bar Association filed a Writ Petition
under Article 32 seeking a 12 | P a g e declaration that the 2020 Rules are ultra vires of Article 14, 21
and 50 of the Constitution apart from being violative of the principles of separation of powers and
independence of the judiciary. According to the Writ Petitioner, the 2020 Rules were also contrary
to the earlier judgments of this Court in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra)9,
Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2014) (supra)10 and Rojer Mathew (supra). Other Writ
Petitions filed in the High Courts were transferred to this Court.
10. We requested Mr. Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Counsel who has been actively associated with
the litigation from the beginning and who was appointed as Amicus Curiae in the earlier rounds to
assist this Court as Amicus Curiae to which he readily and graciously accepted. We have heard Mr.
Arvind P. Datar, learned Senior Counsel (Amicus Curiae), Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, Mr. C.A. Sundaram,
learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Vikas Singh, learned Senior Counsel, Ms. Anitha Shenoy, learned
Senior Counsel, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, Mr. Balbir Singh, learned
Additional Solicitor General, Mr. S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General, Mr. R.
Balasubramanium, learned Senior Counsel, 9 (2010) 11 SCC 1 10 (2014) 10 SCC 1 13 | P a g e Mr.
A.S. Chandhiok, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Virender Ganda, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. M.S.
Ganesh, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. C.S.
Vaidyanathan, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Guru Krishnakumar, learned Senior Counsel, Mr.
Rakesh Kumar Khanna, learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Gautam Misra, learned Senior Counsel, Mr.
P.S. Narasimha, learned Senior Counsel and other learned counsel appearing for the parties. For the
sake of convenience, Writ Petition (Civil) No.804 of 2020 filed by the Madras Bar Association is
taken as the lead case. The points raised in the said Writ Petition will broadly cover all the issues
that have been the subject matter of discussion during the course of the hearing of this case.
11. The main issues raised in the Writ Petition are that the 2020 Rules are unconstitutional as:
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
6

a) The Search-cum-Selection Committees provided for in the 2020 Rules did not
conform to the principles of judicial dominance;
b) Appointment of persons without judicial experience to the posts of Judicial
Members/ Presiding Officer/ Chairpersons is in contravention to the earlier
judgments of this Court;
c) The term of office of the Members for four years is contrary to the earlier decisions
of this Court;
14 | P a g e
d) Advocates are not being made eligible for appointment to most of the Tribunals;
e) Administrative control of the executive in matters relating to appointments and conditions of
service is violative of the principles of separation of powers and independence of judiciary and
demonstrates non-application of mind. NATIONAL TRIBUNALS COMMISSION:
12. Mr. Datar, learned Amicus Curiae submitted that there is an imperative need for the Tribunals to
function independently and free from executive control. Tribunals which are exercising power once
vested with the High Courts and adjudicating disputes should be completely independent to infuse
confidence in the mind of the litigant public. He relied upon the observations of Vivian Bose, J. in
Bidi Supply Co. v. Union of India11 which are as follows:
“The heart and core of a democracy lies in the judicial process, and that means
independent and fearless judges free from executive control brought up in judicial
traditions and trained to judicial ways of working and thinking.” 11 (1956) SCR 267 15
| P a g e
13. Mr. Datar also referred to the Reports of the Franks12 and Leggatt13 Committees which describe
the role of Tribunals in the United Kingdom in a detailed manner. Mr. Datar brought to our notice
that the recommendations of the Leggatt Committee were cited with approval in the judgment of
this Court in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra). According to the learned
Amicus Curiae, the administrative support is provided by a Department of the Government of India,
the Secretary of which is a Member of the Search-cum-Selection Committee. He cited the judgment
of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) to argue that there should be a wholly independent
agency for the administration of all the Tribunals. The learned Amicus Curiae also brought to our
notice a statement made by Mr. Arun Jaitley, the then Minister of Law and Justice on the floor of
the Parliament on 02.08.2001 that there was a proposal to set up a Central Tribunals Division.
According to the learned Amicus Curiae, setting up a National Tribunals Commission as a
supervisory body over the Tribunals would go a long way in 12the Franks Report of 1957 was issued
by a British committee of inquiry chaired by Sir Oliver Franks; the committee was set up by the Lord
Chancellor, in view of concerns voiced with regard to the range, and diversity of tribunals,
uncertainty regarding the procedures they followed and lack of cohesion and supervision. 13
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
7

Finalized in 2001, the Sir Andrew Leggatt Committee reviewed the existing tribunal system in UK in
its report ‘Tribunals for Users – One System, One Service’. The Report, highlighted concerns in the
court system, such as delay, expense, technicality and formality, lack of expertise etc and
recommended, a new ‘independent, coherent, professional, cost-effective, user friendly’ and
structurally reformed Tribunal system 16 | P a g e improving the effective functioning of the
Tribunals and enhancing the public image of the Tribunals. The mounting arrears in the Tribunals is
mainly due to the delay in filling up the vacancies of the Presiding Officers and members of the
Tribunals. The learned Amicus Curiae suggested that there should be a National Tribunals
Commission manned by retired Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of the High Courts and
Members from the Executive which will have a full-time Secretary performing the following
functions:
a) Selection of candidates;
b) Re-appointment of candidates;
c) Conducting of inquiry against Members;
d) Sanction leave of Members wherever necessary;
e) Monitor the functioning of the Tribunals, in particular, the arrears and disposal of
cases and filling up of vacancies and ensuring adequate infrastructure; and
f) Ensure adequate infrastructure and IT support.
14. The learned Attorney General was also of the opinion that constitution of a National Tribunals
Commission would provide a solution to the existing problems and ensure the smooth functioning
of the Tribunals.
15. Docket explosion and mounting arrears are serious problems faced by the justice system in this
country. Initially, creation of 17 | P a g e Tribunals was understood to provide a solution to the
problems and to ease the burden on the Constitutional Courts. Specialized Tribunals were set up to
meet the exigencies of adjudication of disputes in some branches of law. A constant complaint has
been that the Tribunals are not free from the Executive control and that they are not perceived to be
independent judicial bodies. There is an imperative need to ensure that the Tribunals discharge the
judicial functions without any interference of the Executive whether directly or indirectly.
16. This Court has been repeatedly urging the Union of India to set up a single umbrella
organization which would be an independent body to supervise the functioning of the Tribunals and
ensure that the independence of the Members of the Tribunals is maintained. For the first time, this
Court in its judgment in L. Chandra Kumar (supra) persuaded the Government of India to have the
Ministry of Law as the nodal Ministry which would appoint an independent supervisory body to
oversee the working of the Tribunals. The observations in L. Chandra Kumar are to the following
effect:
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
8

“96. ...The situation at present is that different Tribunals constituted under different
enactments are administered by different administrative departments of the Central
and the State Governments. The problem is compounded by the fact that some 18 | P
a g e Tribunals have been created pursuant to Central Legislations and some others
have been created by State Legislations.
However, even in the case of Tribunals created by Parliamentary legislations, there is no uniformity
in administration. We are of the view that, until a wholly independent agency for the administration
of all such Tribunals can be set-up, it is desirable that all such Tribunals should be, as far as
possible, under a single nodal Ministry which will be in a position to oversee the working of these
Tribunals. For a number of reasons that Ministry should appropriately be the Ministry of Law. It
would be open for the Ministry, in its turn, to appoint an independent supervisory body to oversee
the working of the Tribunals. This will ensure that if the President or Chairperson of the Tribunal is
for some reason unable to take sufficient interest in the working of the Tribunal, the entire system
will not languish and the ultimate consumer of justice will not suffer. The creation of a single
umbrella organisation will, in our view, remove many of the ills of the present system. If the need
arises, there can be separate umbrella organisations at the Central and the State levels. Such a
supervisory authority must try to ensure that the independence of the members of all such Tribunals
is maintained. To that extent, the procedure for the selection of the members of the Tribunals, the
manner in which funds are allocated for the functioning of the Tribunals and all other consequential
details will have to be clearly spelt out.” 19 | P a g e
17. In para 70 of Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra), this Court deprecated the
practice of administrative support from the Departments other than the Ministry of Law and
Justice. Dependence on the parent Ministry or departments by the Members of the Tribunal for
their facilities and administrative needs was found to be contrary to the principle of independence of
the judiciary. Later, the learned Amicus Curiae submitted ‘a concept note’ on the National Tribunals
Commission which was approved by this Court in Rojer Mathew v. South Indian Bank Limited14.
This Court was of the opinion that an autonomous oversight body should be established for
recruitment of members and functioning of the Tribunals. In fact, the Court in Rojer Mathew
(supra) even held that control of the tribunals by the executive is fraught and undermines their
independence:
“168. We are in complete agreement with the analogy elucidated by the Constitution
Bench in the Fourth Judges Case (supra) for compulsory need for exclusion of control
of the Executive over quasi-judicial bodies of Tribunals discharging responsibilities
akin to Courts. The Search-cum-Selection Committees as envisaged in the Rules are
against the constitutional scheme inasmuch as they dilute the involvement of
judiciary in the process of appointment of members of 14 (2018) 16 SCC 341 20 | P a
g e tribunals which is in effect an encroachment by the executive on the judiciary.”
18. The suggestions made by the learned Amicus Curiae regarding the setting up of All India
Tribunal Service on the pattern prevalent in the United Kingdom was accepted. This Court was
convinced that the performance and functioning of the Members of the Tribunals must be reviewed
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
9

by the said independent body in the same way as superintendence by the High Courts under Article
235 of the Constitution. By an order dated 07.05.2018, this Court in fact, recommended constitution
of a wholly independent agency to oversee the working of the Tribunals.
19. While considering the vires of validity of the 2017 Rules, this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra)
referred to the current problems faced by the Tribunals. Administration of the Tribunals by the
sponsoring or parent Ministry or Department concerned and dependence for financial,
administrative or other facilities by the Tribunals on the said Department which is a litigant before
them are some of the serious problems highlighted by this Court. There is a likelihood of the
independence of adjudication process being compromised in a situation where the Tribunal is made
dependent 21 | P a g e for its needs on a litigant. The need for financial independence of the
Tribunals has been dealt with by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). A direction was given to the
Ministry of Finance to earmark separate and dedicated funds for the Tribunals from the
Consolidated Fund of India so that the Tribunals will not be under the financial control of the parent
Departments. We reiterate the importance of the constitution of an autonomous oversight body for
recruitment and supervision of the performance of the Tribunals. It is high time that the
observations and suggestions made in this regard by this Court shall be implemented by the Union
of India. An independent body headed by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court supervising the
appointments and the functioning of the Tribunals apart from being in control of any disciplinary
proceedings against the Members would not only improve the functioning of the Tribunals but
would also be in accordance with the principles of judicial independence. We also notice that in the
final directions and conclusions recorded in Roger Mathew (supra)15, the wisdom or legality of
setting up such an independent oversight body was not 15See para 238 of Rojer Mathew (supra),
which refers only the issue relating to Money Bills to a larger bench.
22 | P a g e doubted and it was not referred to a larger Bench, since the view in L. Chandra Kumar
on this point was not doubted.
20. In view of the preceding discussion, we direct the Union of India to set up a National Tribunals
Commission as suggested by this Court by its order dated 07.05.2018 at the earliest. Setting up of
such Commission would enhance the image of the Tribunals and instill confidence in the minds of
the litigants. Dependence of the Tribunals for all their requirements on the parent Department will
not extricate them from the control of the executive. Judicial independence of the Tribunals can be
achieved only when the Tribunals are provided the necessary infrastructure and other facilities
without having to lean on the shoulders of the executive. This can be achieved by establishment of
an independent National Tribunals Commission as suggested above. To stop the dependence of the
Tribunals on their parent Departments for routing their requirements and to ensure speedy
administrative decision making, as an interregnum measure, we direct that there should be a
separate “tribunals wing” established in the Ministry of Finance, Government of India to take up,
deal with and finalize requirements of all the Tribunals till the National Tribunals Commission is
established.
23 | P a g e SEARCH-CUM-SELECTION COMMITTEE:
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
10

21. The contention of the learned Amicus Curiae is that the composition of the
Search-cum-Selection Committees to make recommendations for appointment as
Chairman or Chairperson or President and the other members of the Tribunals is
contrary to the requirements of judicial dominance as held by the judgments of this
Court. Mr. Datar submitted that the Schedule to the 2020 Rules provides for the
Search-cum-Selection Committees for all the 19 Tribunals which broadly consist of
the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by him (who
will serve as the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection committee), outgoing
Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal in case of appointment of the
Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal or the sitting Chairman or
Chairperson or President of the Tribunal in case of appointment of other members of
the Tribunal and two Secretaries to the Government of India. He stated that the
Search-cum-Selection Committees cannot have the Secretaries of the sponsoring
departments as its members, as held by this Court in Madras Bar Association v.
Union of India (2014) (supra).
22. During the course of arguments, the learned Attorney General submitted that the
2020 Rules would be amended providing for a
24 | P a g e casting vote to the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection Committee to allay the
apprehension of the petitioner. In that event, judicial dominance in the Search-cum-Selection
Committee can be maintained as the Chief Justice of India or his nominee and the Presiding Officer
of the Tribunal who is normally a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a
High Court, who represent the judiciary, along with a casting vote to the Chief Justice of India or his
nominee, will be in majority in the Search-cum- Selection Committee. In response to the submission
of the learned Attorney General, Mr. Datar argued that there are some Tribunals where the
Presiding Officer of the Tribunal is not a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of the
High Court or Judge of a High Court. According to Mr. Datar, the Selection Committee should
consist of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee along with another Judge of the Supreme Court
and two Secretaries who are not from the sponsoring departments with a casting vote to the Chief
Justice of India or his nominee.
23. The learned Attorney General for India in his usual fairness submitted that the composition of
the Search-cum-Selection Committees, according to the 2020 Rules consist of the Chief Justice of
India or his nominee, the Chairman or Chairperson or President 25 | P a g e or the outgoing
Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal and two Secretaries to the Government of
India. He submitted that there has been no instance where the Secretaries to Government disagreed
with the views of the Judge of the Supreme Court. All the decisions of the Search-cum-Selection
Committees till now have been unanimous. In any event, he suggested that in case of a dead lock,
the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection Committee who is Chief Justice of India or his
nominee shall have a casting vote and the 2020 Rules will be amended accordingly to include the
casting vote to the Chairperson of the Search-cum- Selection Committee. The learned Attorney
General further submitted that in case the Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal is
himself seeking re-appointment, the Search-cum- Selection Committee shall have another Judge of
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
11

the Supreme Court as a Member. He submitted that the acceptance of the request made by the
petitioner that there should be two Judges of the Supreme Court in the Search-cum-Selection
Committee will lead to practical difficulties. There are 475 members in all the Tribunals put together
and there will be frequent retirements and to fill up the said posts, the requirement for the meetings
of the Search-cum-Selection Committees will arise on a regular basis. It might not be possible for 26
| P a g e two Judges of the Supreme Court to spare so much time in view of their already busy
schedules. Countering the submission of the learned Amicus Curiae that Rule 4 of the 2020 Rules is
violative of the judgments of this Court, the learned Attorney General submitted that this Court in
Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) accepted that the Secretary of the
department concerned can be a member of the Search-cum-Selection Committee. It is to be noted
that this Court held to the contrary in Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2014) (supra). He
argued that in view of the law laid down by this Court in Sundeep Kumar Bafna v. State of
Maharashtra16 that in case of a conflict between decisions of two Coordinate Benches of this Court,
the law laid down by the earlier Bench shall prevail. He further stated that in a later judgment in
Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2015) (supra) this Court approved the
Search-cum-Selection Committee consisting of the Secretary of the sponsoring department.
24. The issue of constitution of the Search-cum-Selection Committees for appointment to the posts
of Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal has been dealt with by this Court earlier. Section 10 FX
of the Companies Act, 1956 provided for constitution 16 (2014) 16 SCC 623 27 | P a g e of a
Search-cum-Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee as the
Chairperson and four Secretaries to the Government of India from the Ministry of Finance and
Company Affairs, Ministry of Labour, and Ministry of Law and Justice respectively as Members. The
validity of Section 10 FX was challenged by the Madras Bar Association as being violative of the
principles of separation of powers and judicial independence. This Court in Union of India v.
Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) while dealing with a judgment of the Madras High Court
held that Parts IB and IC of the Companies Act can be made operational only after making suitable
amendments suggested therein. In respect of the Search-cum-Selection Committee, the amendment
suggested by this Court was that it should consist of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee as
Chairperson and another Judge of the Supreme Court and two Secretaries of the Government of
India from the Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice. It is
relevant to mention that in the said judgment, this Court took note of the fact that the Secretary of
the sponsoring department is serving as a member of the Search-cum-Selection Committee. This
Court was of the opinion that the Tribunals will not be considered independent unless reforms that
were implemented in the United 28 | P a g e Kingdom pursuant to the Report of the Leggatt
Committee are implemented in the Tribunals in India. Nonetheless, this Court observed that the
Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs can be a member of the Search-cum-Selection
Committee for appointment of members to NCLT and NCLAT.
25. In the meanwhile, the Madras Bar Association filed another Writ Petition challenging the
creation of the National Tax Tribunal. With regard to the constitution of the Search-cum-Selection
Committee for the National Tax Tribunal, this Court in Madras Bar Association v. Union of India
(2014) (supra) observed that a party to a litigation, i.e. the Secretary of the concerned department,
cannot be permitted to participate in the selection process for appointment to the posts of
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
12

Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal. This Court was of the opinion that the said procedure
would be contrary to the recognised constitutional conventions reiterated by Lord Diplock in Hinds
v. R17, which is as follows:
“It would make a mockery of the Constitution, if the legislature could transfer the
jurisdiction previously exercisable by holders of judicial offices to holders of a new
court/Tribunal (to which some different name was attached) and to provide that
persons holding the new judicial offices should not be appointed in the 17 (1976) 1 All
ER 353 (PC) 29 | P a g e manner and on the terms prescribed for appointment of
members of the judicature”.
26. Provisions made for the NCLT and NCLAT in the Companies Act, 2013 were again the subject
matter of challenge before this Court in Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2015) (supra).
Section 412 of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with the selection of the Members of the NCLT and
NCLAT. The President of the Tribunal, the Chairperson and Judicial Members of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of India. The
Search-cum-Selection Committee for appointment of the Members of the Tribunal and the
Technical Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of the Chief Justice of India or his
nominee, a Senior Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court and the
Secretaries of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of
Finance. In Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2015) (supra), this Court expressed its
displeasure in the constitution of the Search-cum- Selection Committee which is contrary to the
principles laid down in its earlier judgment in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010)
(supra). Section 412 (2) of the Companies Act, 2013 was held to be not valid as it was found to be
against the binding precedents 30 | P a g e of this Court in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association
(2010) (supra). A direction was issued to remove the deficiency in the constitution of the
Search-cum-Selection Committee by bringing the same into accord with sub-para (viii) of para 120
of the judgment in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (supra).
27. The 2017 Rules were made in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 184 of the Finance
Act, 2017. Rule 4 provides for method of recruitment to the post of Chairman or Chairperson or
President and the Members of the Tribunals. Under the 2017 Rules, the Search-cum-Selection
Committee consisted of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee as the Chairperson and the
Chairman of the Tribunal along with the Secretaries to Government. While striking down the 2017
Rules, this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra) commented that the lack of judicial dominance in the
Search-cum-Selection Committee is in direct contravention of the doctrine of separation of powers
and is an encroachment on the judicial domain18. This Court further observed that excessive
interference by the executive in 18 It was held that “163. We are in agreement with the contentions
of the Learned Counsel for the petitioner(s), that the lack of judicial dominance in the
Search-cum-Selection Committee is in direct contravention of the doctrine of separation of powers
and is an encroachment on the judicial domain. The doctrine of separation of powers has been well
recognised and re-interpreted by this Court as an important facet of the basic structure of the
Constitution, in its dictum in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, and several other later
decisions. The exclusion of the Judiciary from the control and influence of the Executive is not
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
13

limited to traditional Courts alone, but also includes Tribunals since they are formed as an
alternative to Courts and perform judicial functions.” 31 | P a g e appointment of the members
would be detrimental to the independence of judiciary and an affront to the doctrine of separation of
powers. The principles laid down in the aforementioned judgments are binding precedents which
have to be implemented by the Respondent. However, the 2020 Rules which are in challenge in the
Writ Petitions replicate the 2017 Rules in respect of the constitution of the Search-cum-Selection
Committees, insofar as they do not ensure judicial dominance. We appreciate the stand taken by the
learned Attorney General that a casting vote will be given to the Chief Justice of India or his
nominee as the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection Committee. We also accept the submission
of the learned Attorney General that normally the Chairperson of the Tribunal would be a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court. As such, two members of the
judiciary with a casting vote to the Chairperson of the Search- cum-Selection Committee should
ensure judicial dominance over the selection process and take care of the grievances of the Writ
Petitioner. Mr. Datar submitted that there are certain Tribunals in which the Chairperson may not
be a judicial member. In such Tribunals, we are of the opinion that the Search-cum-Selection
Committee should have a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a 32 | P a g e retired Chief Justice of
a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India in place of the Chairperson of the Tribunal.
28. The learned Attorney General stated that the 2020 Rules would be amended to reflect that
whenever the re-appointment of the Chairman or Chairperson or President of a Tribunal is
considered by the Search-cum-Selection Committee, the Chairman or Chairperson or President of
the Tribunal shall be replaced by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a
High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India. We approve this submission of the Attorney
General.
29. It has been repeatedly held by this Court that the Secretaries of the sponsoring departments
should not be members of the Search- cum-Selection Committee. We are not in agreement with the
submission of the learned Attorney General that the Secretary of the sponsoring department being a
member of the Search-cum- Selection Committee was approved by this Court in Union of India v.
Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) and it would prevail over the later judgment in Madras Bar
Association v. Union of India (2014) (supra). We have already referred to the findings recorded in
paragraph 70 of the judgment in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) that the
sponsoring department should 33 | P a g e not have any role to play in the matter of appointment to
the posts of Chairperson and members of the Tribunals. Though the ultimate direction of the Court
was to constitute a Search-cum-Selection Committee for appointment of members to NCLT and
NCLAT of which Secretary, Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs is a member, the ratio of the
judgment is categorical, which is to the effect that Secretaries of the sponsoring departments cannot
be members of the Search-cum-Selection Committee. We, therefore, see no conflict of opinion in the
two judgments as argued by the learned Attorney General. However, we find merit in the
submission of the learned Attorney General that the presence of the Secretary of the sponsoring or
parent department in the Search-cum-Selection Committee will be beneficial to the selection
process. But, for reasons stated above, it is settled that the Secretary of the parent or sponsoring
Department cannot have a say in the process of selection and service conditions of the members of
Tribunals. Ergo, the Secretary to the sponsoring or parent Department shall serve as the
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
14

Member-Secretary/Convener to the Search-cum-Selection Committee and shall function in the
Search-cum-Selection Committee without a vote.
34 | P a g e
30. The Government of India is duty bound to implement the directions issued in the earlier
judgments and constitute the Search- cum-Selection Committees in which the Chief Justice of India
or his nominee shall be the Chairperson along with the Chairperson of the Tribunal if he is a retired
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court and two Secretaries to the
Government of India. In case the Tribunal is headed by a Chairperson who is not a judicial member,
the Search-cum-Selection Committee shall consist of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee as
Chairperson and a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court to
be nominated by the Chief Justice of India and Secretary to the Government of India from the
Ministry of Law and Justice and a Secretary of a department other than the parent or sponsoring
department to be nominated by the Cabinet Secretary. As stated above, the Secretary of the parent
or sponsoring department shall serve as the Member-Secretary or Convener, without a vote.
31. Rule 4 (2) of the Rules postulates that a panel of two or three persons shall be recommended by
the Search-cum-Selection Committee from which the appointments to the posts of Chairperson or
members of the Tribunal shall be made by the Central 35 | P a g e Government. The learned Amicus
Curiae voiced serious objections to Rule 4(2) on the ground that it would be compromising judicial
independence. According to Mr. Datar, the procedure for appointment to the Tribunals should be
completely outside executive control. The learned Attorney General stated that a panel of names
consisting two or three persons is essential because their antecedents have to be examined by the
Intelligence Bureau before appointing them to a Tribunal. He suggested that the number of persons
to be recommended can be two instead of three to limit the discretion of the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet. The recommendations for appointments by the Search-cum-Selection
Committee should be final and the executive should not be permitted to exercise their discretion in
the matter of appointments to the Tribunals. Accordingly, we direct that Rule 4(2) of the 2020 Rules
shall be amended and till so amended, that it be read as empowering the Search-cum-Selection
Committee to recommend the name of only one person for each post. However, taking note of the
submissions made by the learned Attorney General regarding the requirement of the reports of the
selected candidates from the Intelligence Bureau, another suitable person can be selected by the
Search-cum-Selection Committee and placed in the waiting list. In 36 | P a g e case, the report of the
Intelligence Bureau regarding the selected candidate is not satisfactory, then the candidate in the
waiting list can be appointed.
TERM OF OFFICE
32. Mr. Datar argued that the term of office of the Chairperson and the members of the Tribunal
should be for a minimum period of five years by relying upon the judgments of this Court in S.P.
Sampath Kumar (supra), Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) and Rojer
Mathew (supra). He referred to Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 which stipulated the term of
office shall be for a period not exceeding five years. He submitted that in spite of this Court holding
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
15

that the tenure should be between five to seven years, the 2020 Rules have provided for only four
years as the maximum term. According to him, a term of minimum five years for the members of the
Tribunals with a right of re-appointment is mandatory. Citing Rule 9(2) of the 2020 Rules which
stipulates that the term of office shall be four years or till a person attains the age of 65 years
whichever is earlier, the learned Amicus Curiae argued that a Judge of a High Court will not get
more than three years as a member of the Tribunal after his retirement at the age of 62 years 37 | P a
g e even if he is appointed immediately after his superannuation. He mentioned that in 18 out of the
19 Tribunals governed by the 2020 Rules, retired Judges of High Courts can be appointed either as
Vice Chairperson or as the member. In view of the delay in making appointments, most of such
retired Judges of High Courts will normally have a very short tenure of not more than two years.
Therefore, Mr. Datar submitted that Rule 9 (2) requires to be struck down as being arbitrary.
33. According to the learned Attorney General, as the term of four years is subject to
re-appointment, it would not make much of a difference if the term fixed is four years instead of five
years. He mentioned that due to the provision for re-appointment, eligible lawyers who shall be
appointed at the age of 45 years will have the advantage of four or five extensions or till the said
member reaches the age of 65 years.
34. This Court directed the extension of the tenure of the members of the Tribunal from three years
to seven or five years subject to their eligibility in the case of Union of India v. Madras Bar
Association (2010) (supra). This Court was of the opinion that the term of three years is very short
and by the time the members achieve the required knowledge, expertise and efficiency, the term
would be 38 | P a g e over. In the said judgment it was further observed that the Tribunals would
function effectively and efficiently only when they are able to attract younger members who have a
reasonable period of service. In spite of the above precedent, a tenure of three years was fixed for the
members of Tribunals in the 2017 Rules. While setting aside the 2017 Rules, this Court in Rojer
Mathew (supra) held that a short period of service of three years is anti-merit as it would have the
effect of discouraging meritorious candidates to accept the posts of judicial members in the
Tribunals. In addition, this Court was also convinced that the short tenure of members increases
interference by the executive jeopardizing the independence of judiciary.
35. The 2020 Rules are not in compliance with the principles of law laid down in Union of India v.
Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) and Rojer Mathew (supra) in respect of the tenure of the
members of the Tribunals in spite of this Court repeatedly holding that short tenure of members is
detrimental to the efficiency and independence of the Tribunals. Rule 9(1) of the 2020 Rules provide
for a term of four years or till a Chairman or Chairperson or President attains the age of 70 years
whichever is earlier. No rationale except that four years is more than three years prescribed in the
2017 Rules (described as too short, in Roger Mathew (supra)) was put forward 39 | P a g e on behalf
of the Union of India. In so far as the posts of Vice Chairman or Vice-Chairperson or Vice-President
and members are concerned, Rule 9(2) fixes the tenure as four years or till they attain the age of 65
years whichever is earlier. In view of the law laid down in the earlier judgments, we direct the
modification of the tenure in Rules 9(1) and 9(2) of the 2020 Rules as five years in respect of
Chairman or Chairperson, Vice Chairman or Vice-Chairperson and the members. Rule 9(1) permits
a Chairman, Chairperson or President of the Tribunal to continue till 70 years which is in
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
16

conformity with Parliamentary mandate in Section 184 of the Finance Act. However, Rule 9(2)
provides that Vice Chairman and other members shall hold office till they attain 65 years. We are in
agreement with the submission made by the learned Amicus Curiae that under the 2020 Rules, the
Vice Chairman, Vice-Chairperson or Vice-President or members in almost all the Tribunals will have
only a short tenure of less than three years if the maximum age is 65 years. We, therefore, direct the
Government to amend Rule 9 (1) of the 2020 Rules by making the term of Chairman, Chairperson
or President as five years or till they attain 70 years, whichever is earlier and other members dealt
with in Rule 9(2) as five years or till they attain 67 years, whichever is earlier.
40 | P a g e
36. Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 provides for reappointment of Chairpersons,
Vice-Chairpersons and members of the Tribunals on completion of their tenure. There is no
mention of reappointment in the 2020 Rules. However, the learned Attorney General submitted
that the members shall be entitled to seek reappointment. Reappointment for at least one term shall
be provided to the persons who are appointed to the Tribunals at a young age by giving preference to
the service rendered by them. HOUSE RENT ALLOWANCE
37. According to Rule 15 of the 2020 Rules, the Chairperson and the other members of the Tribunals
shall be entitled to house rent allowance at the same rate admissible to officers of the Government of
India holding grade ‘A’ posts carrying the same pay. The contention of the learned Amicus Curiae is
that it is a well-known fact that it is difficult to get Judges of High Courts of merit and ability as
members of Tribunals, particularly due to the absence of a provision for housing. Lack of housing
facilities becomes a deterrent for retired Judges from States outside Delhi to accept appointments to
the Tribunals. It will not be possible for a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of
a High Court or a Judge of a 41 | P a g e High Court to get suitable accommodation in Delhi, where
most of the Tribunals are situated, for Rs. 75,000/- per month which is paid as house rent
allowance. Similarly, where tribunals have benches, members (especially those drawn from amongst
Advocates) would find it hard put to find accommodation if there is insufficient incentive, whenever
they have to move to different cities. The learned Attorney General relied upon the observations
made by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra) that the retired Judges of the High Court cannot be
equated with the sitting Judges of the High Court and are not entitled to the same perquisites. It is
also the submission of the learned Attorney General that it is not possible to provide housing to all
the Presiding Officers and members of the Tribunals in view of the acute shortage of housing in
Delhi.
38. Experience has shown that lack of housing in Delhi has been one of the reasons for retired
Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court to not accept appointments to Tribunals. At the
same time, scarcity of housing is also a factor which needs to be kept in mind. The only way to find a
solution to this problem is to direct the Government of India to make serious efforts to provide
suitable housing to the Chairperson and the members of the Tribunals and in case providing
housing is not possible, to enhance the house rent 42 | P a g e allowance to Rs.1,25,000/- for
members of Tribunals and Rs.1,50,000/- for the Chairman or Chairperson or President and Vice
Chairman or Vice Chairperson or Vice President of Tribunals. In other words, an option should be
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
17

given to the Chairperson and the members of the Tribunals to either apply for housing
accommodation to be provided by the Government of India as per the existing rules or to accept the
enhanced house rent allowance. This direction shall be effective from 01.01.2021. ADVOCATES AS
JUDICIAL MEMBERS
39. The learned Amicus Curiae complained of the deliberate exclusion of the Advocates from being
considered for appointment as judicial members in a majority of Tribunals by the 2020 Rules. It was
argued that in respect of seven tribunals (such as Central Administrative Tribunal, Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal, Customs Excise and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, etc.), the 2020 Rules impose
a new condition whereby Advocates without 25 years of experience are ineligible. It is submitted
that there is nothing in the provisions of the Finance Act, 2017, with respect to exclusion, from
consideration, of Advocates, nor any restrictive condition and, on the other hand, the parent
enactments and previously existing rules enabled Advocates (who were eligible to be appointed as
Judges of 43 | P a g e High Courts) to be considered for appointment for these tribunals. The
learned Amicus curiae argued that it would be very difficult for competent and successful Advocates,
in the concerned field, to uproot themselves and accept membership of tribunals, if they are to be
eligible at the late age of 50 years and resultantly, those less competent would be willing, contrary to
public interest. The Attorney General had submitted that exclusion of Advocates was a matter of
policy and that the eligibility condition wherever they could be considered, in some tribunals of 25
years practice, was to bring about parity with members of the Indian Legal Service, who could, in
some instances be considered for appointment as judicial members. During the submissions, the
Attorney General had fairly stated that the 2020 Rules will be amended making Advocates eligible
for appointment in the tribunals where they are presently excluded under the 2020 Rules as judicial
members provided, they have 25 years of experience. This is in line with the previous rulings of this
Court that advocates and retired judges are to be considered as judicial members of tribunals.
Furthermore, this Court notices that the 2017 Rules did not exclude Advocates from consideration;
nor did they impose restrictive eligibility conditions, such as 25 years of experience.
44 | P a g e
40. The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that stipulation of 25 years of experience would be a
serious handicap in selecting meritorious candidates from among advocates. He suggested that
Advocates with the standing of 15 years at the bar should be made eligible for being considered for
appointment as judicial members to the Tribunals. The learned Amicus Curiae further submitted
that Advocates should be made eligible for appointment to Single Member Tribunals, particularly to
the Debt Recovery Tribunals as their experience in law can be suitably utilized. It is the submission
of learned Attorney General that though the Constitution prescribes that an Advocate having
experience of 10 years can be considered for appointment as a Judge of a High Court, normally an
Advocate is considered only after he attains the age of 45 years. He suggested that an experience of
25 years at the Bar would make Advocates at the age of 47-48 years eligible for appointment as
judicial members of the Tribunals. It would be attractive for the Advocates to apply for appointment
to the post of judicial members of the Tribunals after having experience of 25 years, especially due to
the provision for re- appointment.
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
18

41. In view of the submission of the learned Attorney General that the 2020 the Rules will be
amended to make Advocates eligible for 45 | P a g e appointment to the post of judicial members of
the Tribunals, the only question that remains is regarding their experience at the bar. While the
Attorney General suggested that an advocate who has 25 years of experience should be considered
for appointment as a Judicial member, the learned Amicus Curiae suggested that it should be 15
years. An Advocate of a High Court with experience of ten years is qualified for appointment as a
Judge of the High Court as per Article 217 (2) of the Constitution of India. As the qualification for an
advocate of a High Court for appointment as a Judge of a High Court is only 10 years, we are of the
opinion that the experience at the bar should be on the same lines for being considered for
appointment as a judicial member of a Tribunal. Exclusion of Advocates in 10 out of 19 tribunals, for
consideration as judicial members, is therefore, contrary to Union of India v. Madras Bar
Association (2010)19 and Madras Bar Association v. Union of India (2015)20. However, it is left
open to the Search-cum-Selection Committee to take into account in the experience of the Advocates
at the bar and the specialization of the Advocates in the relevant branch of law while considering
them for appointment as judicial members.
19 Para 120 (i) @ page 65, 2010 (11) SCC 1 @ page 65 20 Para 27, page 608 (2015 (8) SCC 583) 46 |
P a g e ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS OF INDIAN LEGAL SERVICE
42. The grievance of the learned Amicus Curiae is that members of the Indian Legal Service have
been made eligible for appointment as judicial members to some Tribunals in spite of the judgment
of this Court in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra), wherein it was held that
they can only be appointed as technical members. The contention of the Union of India is that there
is a conflict of opinion in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) and the judgment
of this Court in S.P. Sampath Kumar (supra). It was argued that this Court in S.P. Sampath Kumar
(supra) upheld the appointment of the members of the Indian Legal Service as judicial members
whereas in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra), it was held that the members of
the Indian Legal Services can only be appointed as technical members of Tribunals. It was argued by
the learned Attorney General that the judgment of this Court in S.P. Sampath Kumar (supra) shall
prevail over a later judgment as both the judgments are delivered by Constitution Benches of five
Judges. Further submission made by the learned Attorney General is that members of Indian Legal
Service are practicing lawyers who have experience of 7 years to 13 years depending upon the grade
in which they were recruited. He also 47 | P a g e referred to the different cadres in the Indian Legal
Service which are directly related to law such as Advocates-on-Record or instructing counsel
working in the Central Agency Section in this Court or holding the post of Director of Prosecution in
the Central Bureau of Investigation or legal advisors in the Ministry of Law and Justice. The learned
Attorney General further submitted that the experience of the members of Indian Legal Service in
various branches of law would stand in good stead for their appointment as judicial members. The
learned Amicus Curiae does not have an objection to members of Indian Legal Service who are
practicing in Courts as Government Advocates to be considered for appointment as judicial
members in Tribunals. But he suggested that this can be done only by a legislative amendment in
light of the law laid down in Union of India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra). He also
submitted that specialization being a mandatory requirement for Advocates should be the same for
members of the Indian Legal Service.
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
19

43. As we have already held that Advocates are entitled to be considered as judicial members of the
Tribunals, we see no harm in members of the Indian Legal Service being considered as judicial
members, provided they satisfy the criteria relating to the standing at the bar and specialization
required. The judgment of Union of 48 | P a g e India v. Madras Bar Association (2010) (supra) did
not take note of the above points relating to the experience of members of Indian Legal Service at
the bar. The Indian Legal Service was considered along with the other civil services for the purpose
of holding that the members of Indian Legal Service are entitled to be appointed only as technical
members. In the light of the submission made by the learned Attorney General and the Amicus
Curiae, we hold that the members of Indian Legal Service shall be entitled to be considered for
appointment as a judicial member subject to their fulfilling the other criteria which advocates are
subjected to. In addition, the nature of work done by the members of the Indian Legal Service and
their specialization in the relevant branches of law shall be considered by the Search-cum-Selection
Committee while evaluating their candidature.
44. We would wish to emphasize here that the setting up of tribunals, and the subject matters they
are expected to deal with, having regard to the challenges faced by a growing modern economy, are
matters of executive policy. When it comes to personnel who would operate these tribunals (given
that the issues they decide would ultimately reach this Court, in appellate review or in some cases,
judicial review), competence, especially in matters of 49 | P a g e law as well as procedure to be
adopted by such judicial bodies, becomes matters of concern for this Court. These tribunals
discharge a judicial role, and with respect to matters entrusted to them, the jurisdiction of civil
courts is usually barred. Therefore, wherever legal expertise in the particular domain is implicated,
it would be natural that advocates with experience in the same, or ancillary field would provide the
“catchment” for consideration for membership. This is also the case with selection of technical
members, who would have expertise in the scientific or technical, or wherever required, policy
background. These tribunals are expected to be independent, vibrant and efficient in their
functioning. Appointment of competent lawyers and technical members is in furtherance of judicial
independence. Younger advocates who are around 45 years old bring in fresh perspectives. Many
states induct lawyers just after 7 years of practice directly as District Judges. If the justice delivery
system by tribunals is to be independent and vibrant, absorbing technological changes and rapid
advances, it is essential that those practitioners with a certain vitality, energy and enthusiasm are
inducted. 25 years of practice even with a five-year degree holder, would mean that the minimum
age of induction would be 48 years: it may be more, given the time taken to process
recommendations.
50 | P a g e Therefore, a tenure without assured re-engagements would not be feasible. A younger
lawyer, who may not be suitable to continue after one tenure (or is reluctant to continue), can still
return, to the bar, than an older one, who may not be able to piece her life together again.
REMOVAL OF MEMBERS
45. Rule 8 of the 2020 Rules provides the procedure for inquiry of misbehavior or incapacity of a
member. According to the said Rule, the preliminary scrutiny of the complaint is done by the
Central Government. If the Central Government finds that there are reasonable grounds for
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
20

conducting an inquiry into the allegations made against a member in the complaint, it shall make a
reference to the Search-cum-Selection Committee which shall conduct an inquiry and submit the
report to the Central Government. The learned Amicus Curiae argued that there is no clarity in the
Rules as to whether the reports submitted by the Search-cum-Selection Committee are binding on
the Central Government. According to Mr. Datar, it is impermissible for the Central Government to
further scrutinize the report of the Search-cum-Selection Committee which comprises of sitting and
retired Judges. He submitted that the proper procedure to be followed in matters of complaints
against the 51 | P a g e Presiding Officers and members of the Tribunals is that a preliminary
scrutiny may be made by the Central Government and the report should be placed before the
Search-cum-Selection Committee. It is open to the Search-cum-Selection Committee to accept or
reject the preliminary scrutiny. In case the Search-cum-Selection Committee is of the opinion that
the findings of the preliminary scrutiny are correct, then the Search-cum-Selection Committee
should be entitled to proceed further to conduct an inquiry on its own, if it so choses. The findings of
the Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be final and the action recommended by the
Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be implemented by the Central Government.
46. The learned Attorney General submitted that the preliminary scrutiny done by the Central
Government, according to Rule 8 (1) is only for the purpose of weeding out frivolous complaints.
The learned Attorney General has also fairly submitted that the recommendations made by the
Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be implemented by the Central Government. We are in
agreement with the submissions of the learned Attorney General.
52 | P a g e TIME LIMIT FOR APPOINTMENT
47. The learned Amicus Curiae brought to our notice that there are several instances where
appointments are delayed even after the selections are completed by the Search-cum-Selection
Committee. The learned Attorney General also agreed that there is an imminent need for
appointments to be made in an expeditious manner, but implored that no time be fixed for making
appointments. The very reason for constituting Tribunals is to supplement the functions of the High
Courts and the other Courts and to ensure that the consumer of justice gets speedy redressal to his
grievances. This would be defeated if the Tribunals do not function effectively. It has been brought
to our notice that there are a large number of unfilled vacancies hampering the progress of the
functioning of the Tribunals. The pendency of cases in the Tribunals is increasing mainly due to the
lack of personnel in the Tribunals which is due to the delay in filling up the vacancies as and when
they arise due to the retirement of the members. There is imminent need for expediting the process
of selections and appointments to ensure speedy justice. We, therefore, direct that the Government
of India shall make the appointments to the Tribunals within three months after the Search-
53 | P a g e cum-Selection Committee completes the selection and makes its recommendations.
RETROSPECTIVITY OF THE 2020 RULES
48. The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that the 2020 Rules have been made in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017. Rule 1(2) provides that Rules shall come
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
21

into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette. According to the learned Amicus
Curiae, the Rules have come into force on 12.02.2020, the date on which they were notified. He
stated that it is a well settled principle that delegated legislations such as Rules, notifications and
circulars cannot have retrospective effect unless the parent statute itself permits such retrospective
effect. He stated that Section 183 of the Finance Act, 2017 enabled the notification of Rules made
under Section 184 to take effect from the appointed day. Under Section 157 (a) of the Finance Act,
2017, the appointed day means such date as the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette appoint. The date on which Rules were notified is 12.02.2020. The learned Amicus Curiae
relied upon the judgment of this Court in Sri Vijayalakshmi Rice Mills v. State of A.P.21 to argue that
the Rules cannot be given retrospective effect. He stated 21 (1976) 3 SCC 37 54 | P a g e that the 2017
Rules have become non est after being struck down in Rojer Mathew (supra) and the 2020 Rules
cannot be treated as an amendment or modification of the 2017 Rules. He stressed on the point that
giving retrospective effect to 2020 Rules would result in inequitable consequences and serious
hardship. For instance, some Vice Chairpersons, Vice Presidents and Vice Chairmen were appointed
for a period of three years with an upper age limit of 67 years under the 2017 Rules. However, under
the 2020 Rules their appointment period is four years with the upper age limit of 65 years. The term
of office of persons who are appointed under the 2017 Rules would be altered if the 2020 Rules are
given retrospective effect. The learned Amicus Curiae was supported by other Senior Counsel who
vehemently argued that the 2020 Rules are only prospective.
49. The Attorney General argued that Section 183 of the Finance Act, 2017 provided that the Rules
made under Section 184 shall have effect from the appointed day which was 26.05.2017. As per
Section 183, all persons appointed prior to 26.05.2017 would be governed by the old Acts and Rules
under which the Tribunals were established and those who are appointed after 26.05.2017 would be
governed by the 2017 Rules. The Attorney General further argued that though the 2017 Rules were
struck down by this Court in Rojer 55 | P a g e Mathew (supra), an opportunity was given to the
Government of India to frame new Rules and place them before this Court. As the new Rules have
been framed in exercise of powers under the Finance Act, 2017, the 2020 Rules would be effective
from 26.05.2017. The Government of India has filed M.A. No. 1152 of 2020 in Writ Petition (C) No.
279 of 2017 seeking a direction that the 2020 Rules would apply to all persons appointed as
Members, Presidents and Chairpersons to the Tribunals after appointed day i.e. 26.05.2017 in
accordance with the mandate of Section 183 of the Finance Act.
50. Before expressing our view on this point, it would be necessary to refer to certain interim orders
that were passed by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). By an order dated 09.02.2018, this Court
gave certain interim directions regarding constitution of the Search- cum-Selection Committee and
other issues in relation to appointments to the post of members of the Central Administrative
Tribunal. The direction with which we are concerned at present pertains to appointments that were
directed to be made pursuant to the recommendations of the interim Search-cum-Selection
Committee which shall abide by the conditions of service stipulated in the old Acts and Rules. By an
order dated 20.03.2018, the order 56 | P a g e passed on 09.02.2018 was clarified by this Court and
the tenure of the Chairperson and the members was directed to be for a period of five years. There is
another order passed on 21.08.2018 by this Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 279 of 2017 by which it
was clarified that appointments made to the post of members of the Customs Excise Sales Tax
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
22

Appellate Tribunal shall be for a period of five years or till the member attains the age of 62 years.
This Court clarified that the President shall continue till he attains the age of 65 years. In respect of
the Central Administrative Tribunal, the old Rules were directed to be applied.
51. The 2017 Rules have been declared as being contrary to the parent enactment and the principles
envisaged in the Constitution and hence struck down by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). The
Central Government was directed to reformulate the Rules in conformity and in accordance with the
principles delineated by this Court in its earlier judgment and the observations made in Rojer
Mathew (supra). The 2020 Rules are made in exercise of the power conferred under Section 184 of
the Finance Act which came into force on their publication in the official Gazette as per Rule 1(2).
The date of publication of the 2020 Rules is 12.02.2020. We are unable to accept the submission of
learned Attorney General that the 2020 57 | P a g e Rules which replaced the 2017 Rules shall come
into force with effect from 26.05.2017 which was the appointed day in accordance with the 2017
Rules. It is true that the 2017 Rules were brought into force from 26.05.2017 and Section 183 of the
Finance Act provides for any appointment made after the appointed day shall be in accordance with
the Rules made under Section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017. 2017 Rules which have come into force
with effect from 26.05.2017 in accordance with Section 183 have been struck down by this Court.
The 2020 Rules which came into force from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette, i.e.
12.02.2020, cannot be given retrospective effect. The intention of Government of India to make the
2020 Rules prospective is very clear from the notification dated 12.02.2020. In any event,
subordinate legislation cannot be given retrospective effect unless the parent statute specifically
provides for the same.22
52. As we have held that the 2020 Rules are not retrospective, the point that remains to be
determined is the applicable Rules for appointments that were made prior to the 2020 Rules. The
appointments made during the pendency of Rojer Mathew (supra) 22ITO v. M.C. Ponnoose, (1969)
2 SCC 351; Sri Vijayalakshmi Rice Mills v. State of A.P., (1976) 3 SCC
37. 58 | P a g e on the date of interim orders passed therein and appointments made after the
judgment of Rojer Mathew (supra), like the appointments made prior to the 2017 Rules are, no
doubt, to be governed by the then existing parent Acts and Rules. In view of the interim orders
passed by this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra), appointments made during the pendency of the case
in this Court are also to be governed by the parent Acts and Rules and the clarifications issued by
this Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). According to paragraph 224 of the judgment in Rojer Mathew
(supra), the appointments to the Tribunals were directed to be in terms of the respective Acts and
Rules which governed appointments to Tribunals prior to the enactment of the Finance Act, 2017.
For the purpose of clarity, we hold that all appointments made prior to the 2020 Rules which came
into force on 12.02.2020 shall be governed by the parent Acts and Rules. Any appointment made
after the 2020 Rules have come into force shall be in accordance with the 2020 Rules subject to the
modifications directed in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment.
53. The upshot of the above discussion leads this court to issue the following directions:
59 | P a g e
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
23

(i) The Union of India shall constitute a National Tribunals Commission which shall
act as an independent body to supervise the appointments and functioning of
Tribunals, as well as to conduct disciplinary proceedings against members of
Tribunals and to take care of administrative and infrastructural needs of the
Tribunals, in an appropriate manner. Till the National Tribunals Commission is
constituted, a separate wing in the Ministry of Finance, Government of India shall be
established to cater to the requirements of the Tribunals.
(ii) Instead of the four-member Search-cum-Selection Committees provided for in Column (4) of the
Schedule to the 2020 Rules with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee, outgoing or sitting
Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal and two Secretaries to the Government of
India, the Search- cum-Selection Committees should comprise of the following members:
(a) The Chief Justice of India or his nominee—Chairperson (with a casting vote).
(b) The outgoing Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal in case of
appointment of the Chairman or 60 | P a g e Chairperson or President of the Tribunal
(or) the sitting Chairman or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal in case of
appointment of other members of the Tribunal (or) a retired Judge of the Supreme
Court of India or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court in case the Chairman or
Chairperson or President of the Tribunal is not a Judicial member or if the Chairman
or Chairperson or President of the Tribunal is seeking re-appointment—member;
(c) Secretary to the Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India—member;
(d) Secretary to the Government of India from a department other than the parent or sponsoring
department, nominated by the Cabinet Secretary—member;
(e) Secretary to the sponsoring or parent Ministry or Department—Member Secretary/Convener
(without a vote). Till amendments are carried out, the 2020 Rules shall be read in the manner
indicated.
(iii) Rule 4(2) of the 2020 Rules shall be amended to provide that the Search-cum-Selection
Committee shall recommend the name of one person for appointment to each post instead of a 61 |
P a g e panel of two or three persons for appointment to each post.
Another name may be recommended to be included in the waiting list.
(iv) The Chairpersons, Vice-Chairpersons and the members of the Tribunal shall hold office for a
term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment. Rule 9(2) of the 2020 Rules shall be
amended to provide that the Vice-Chairman, Vice- Chairperson and Vice President and other
members shall hold office till they attain the age of sixty-seven years.
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
24

(v) The Union of India shall make serious efforts to provide suitable housing to the Chairman or
Chairperson or President and other members of the Tribunals. If providing housing is not possible,
the Union of India shall pay the Chairman or Chairperson or President and Vice-Chairman, Vice-
Chairperson, Vice President of the Tribunals an amount of Rs. 1,50,000/- per month as house rent
allowance and Rs. 1,25,000/- per month for other members of the Tribunals. This direction shall be
effective from 01.01.2021.
(vi) The 2020 Rules shall be amended to make advocates with an experience of at least 10 years
eligible for appointment as judicial members in the Tribunals. While considering 62 | P a g e
advocates for appointment as judicial members in the Tribunals, the Search-cum-Selection
Committee shall take into account the experience of the Advocate at the bar and their specialization
in the relevant branches of law. They shall be entitled for reappointment for at least one term by
giving preference to the service rendered by them for the Tribunals.
(vii) The members of the Indian Legal Service shall be eligible for appointment as judicial members
in the Tribunals, provided that they fulfil the criteria applicable to advocates subject to suitability to
be assessed by the Search-cum-Selection Committee on the basis of their experience and knowledge
in the specialized branch of law.
(viii) Rule 8 of the 2020 Rules shall be amended to reflect that the recommendations of the
Search-cum-Selection Committee in matters of disciplinary actions shall be final and the
recommendations of the Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be implemented by the Central
Government.
(ix) The Union of India shall make appointments to Tribunals within three months from the date on
which the Search-cum-Selection Committee completes the selection process and makes its
recommendations.
63 | P a g e
(x) The 2020 Rules shall have prospective effect and will be applicable from 12.02.2020, as per Rule
1(2) of the 2020 Rules.
(xi) Appointments made prior to the 2017 Rules are governed by the parent Acts and Rules which
established the concerned Tribunals. In view of the interim orders passed by the Court in Rojer
Mathew (supra), appointments made during the pendency of Rojer Mathew (supra) were also
governed by the parent Acts and Rules. Any appointments that were made after the 2020 Rules
came into force i.e. on or after 12.02.2020 shall be governed by the 2020 Rules subject to the
modifications directed in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment.
(xii) Appointments made under the 2020 Rules till the date of this judgment, shall not be
considered invalid, insofar as they conformed to the recommendations of the Search-cum- Selection
Committees in terms of the 2020 Rules. Such appointments are upheld, and shall not be called into
question on the ground that the Search-cum-Selection Committees which recommended the
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
25

appointment of Chairman, Chairperson, President or other members were in terms of the 2020
Rules, as they stood before the modifications directed in this judgment. They are, in other words,
saved.
64 | P a g e
(xiii) In case the Search-cum-Selection Committees have made recommendations after conducting
selections in accordance with the 2020 Rules, appointments shall be made within three months
from today and shall not be subject matter of challenge on the ground that they are not in accord
with this judgment.
(xiv) The terms and conditions relating to salary, benefits, allowances, house rent allowance etc.
shall be in accordance with the terms indicated in, and directed by this judgment.
(xv) The Chairpersons, Vice Chairpersons and members of the Tribunals appointed prior to
12.02.2020 shall be governed by the parent statutes and Rules as per which they were appointed.
The 2020 Rules shall be applicable with the modifications directed in the preceding paragraphs to
those who were appointed after 12.02.2020. While reserving the matter for judgment on
09.10.2020, we extended the term of the Chairpersons, Vice-Chairpersons and members of the
Tribunals till 31.12.2020. In view of the final judgment on the 2020 Rules, the retirements of the
Chairpersons, Vice- Chairpersons and the members of the Tribunals shall be in accordance with the
applicable Rules as mentioned above.
65 | P a g e
54. We will be failing in our duty unless we acknowledge the invaluable assistance of Mr. Arvind
Datar, learned Amicus Curiae, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General, Mr. S.V. Raju and Mr.
Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitors General and the other senior counsel and advocates.
55. For the aforementioned reasons, the Writ Petitions, Transfer Petitions, Civil Appeals and all the
Applications are disposed of. Epilogue Dispensation of justice by the Tribunals can be effective only
when they function independent of any executive control: this renders them credible and generates
public confidence. We have noticed a disturbing trend of the Government not implementing the
directions issued by this Court. To ensure that the Tribunals should not function as another
department under the control of the executive, repeated directions have been issued which have
gone unheeded forcing the Petitioner to approach this Court time and again. It is high time that we
put an end to this practice. Rules are framed which are completely contrary to the directions issued
by this Court. Upon the tribunals has devolved the task of marking boundaries of what is legally
permissible and feasible (as opposed to what is not lawful and is indefensible) conduct, in a
normative 66 | P a g e sense guiding future behavior of those subject to the jurisdictions of such
tribunals. This task is rendered even more crucial, given that appeals against their decisions lie
directly to the Supreme Court and public law intervention on the merits of such decisions is all but
excluded. Also, these tribunals are expected to be consistent, and therefore, adhere to their
precedents, inasmuch as they oversee regulatory behavior in several key areas of the economy.
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
26

Therefore, it is crucial that these tribunals are run by a robust mix of experts, i.e. those with
experience in policy in the relevant field, and those with judicial or legal experience and competence
in such fields. The functioning or non-functioning of any of these tribunals due to lack of
competence or understanding has a direct adverse impact on those who expect effective and swift
justice from them. The resultant fallout is invariably an increased docket load, especially by recourse
to Article 226 of the Constitution of India. These aspects are highlighted once again to stress that
these tribunals do not function in isolation, but are a part of the larger scheme of justice
dispensation envisioned by the Constitution and have to function independently, and effectively, to
live up to their mandate. The involvement of this Court, in the series of decisions, rendered by no
less than six Constitution Benches, underscores the importance of this aspect. The role of both 67 | P
a g e the courts as upholders of judicial independence, and the executive as the policy making and
implementing limb of governance, is to be concordat and collaborative. This Court expects that the
present directions are adhered to and implemented, so that future litigation is avoided.
The Government is, accordingly, directed to strictly adhere to the directions given above and not
force the Petitioner-Madras Bar Association, which has been relentless in its efforts to ensure
judicial independence of the Tribunals, to knock the doors of this Court again.
...................................J. [L. NAGESWARA RAO] ..................................J. [HEMANT GUPTA]
..................................J. [S. RAVINDRA BHAT] New Delhi, November 27, 2020.
68 | P a g e
Madras Bar Association vs Union Of India on 27 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66126971/
27
