Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on
22 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3779, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
431
Author: Aniruddha Bose
Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, Aniruddha Bose, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                             (REPORTABLE)
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4242 OF 2019
         MAHARASTHRA SEAMLESS LIMITED                                ...APPELLANT
                                                 VERSUS
         PADMANABHAN VENKATESH & ORS.                                ...RESPONDENTS
                                                     WITH
                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4967-4968 OF 2019
                                               JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
These proceedings arise out of Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) involving United
Seamless Tubulaar Private Limited, the corporate debtor. The successful Resolution Applicant,
Maharashtra Seamless Ltd. (MSL) is the appellant in C.A. No. 4242 NATARAJANof 2019. The total
debt of the corporate debtor was Rs. 1897 crores, out of which Rs.1652 crores comprised of term
loans from two entities of Deutsche Bank. These are DB International (Asia) Limited and Deutsche
Bank AG, Singapore Branch. There was also debt on account of working capital borrowing of Rs. 245
crores from another bank, being Indian Bank. Said Indian Bank is the initiator of the CIRP, who
filed an application under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (the Code). DB
International (Asia Ltd.) is the appellant in C.A. No.4967-68 of 2019. A concern by the name of
UMW had provided corporate guarantee to Deutsche Bank, Singapore as collateral to the said term
loan. The Adjudicating Authority, the National Company Law Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench (NCLT)
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
1

by an order passed on 21st January, 2019 approved the resolution plan submitted by MSL in an
application filed by the Resolution Professional. This resolution plan included an upfront payment
of Rs. 477 crores. Ancillary directions were issued by the Adjudicating Authority while giving
approval to the said resolution plan with the finding that the said plan met all the requirements of
Section 30(2) of the Code. This order was carried up in appeal before the National Company Law
Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT), being the Appellate Authority under the Code by two persons who
were parties before the NCLT. They were one of the promoters of the corporate debtor,
Padmanabhan Venkatesh and the Indian Bank. These appeals were registered as Company Appeal
(AT) (Insol.) Nos. 128 & 247 of 2019. The appellant in Company Law (AT) (Insol.) No. 128/2019 was
said Padmanabhan Venkatesh. The appellant in Company Law (AT) (Insol.) No. 247 of 2019 was the
Indian Bank. These two appeals were heard with another appeal filed by the successful Resolution
Applicant (MSL) against an order of the Adjudicating Authority passed on 28th February 2019. The
MSL’s appeal was registered as Company Appeal (AT) (Insol.) No. 220 of 2019.
2. This appeal by MSL was in connection with I.A. No. 125 of 2019 filed by them in CP(IB) No.
49/7/HDB/2017. In that application, MSL sought directions upon the corporate debtor as also the
police and administrative authorities for effective implementation of the resolution plan. Grievance
of MSL in that proceeding was that they were not being given access to the assets of the corporate
debtor. The Adjudicating Authority, while disposing of the application, directed, inter-alia:-
“20. Even though appeal is preferred by Respondent No.5 to the Hon’ble NCLAT,
there is no stay and the appeal is coming up for hearing on 07.03.2019. The
implementation of this Plan is subject to the outcome of the Appeal. Therefore, a
direction can be given to the concerned to extend cooperation to the Applicant herein
in implanting the Resolution Plan of the Corporate Debtor Company and it is only
subject to the outcome of the Appeal which is pending before Hon’ble NCLAT.
21. A direction cannot be given to the Superintendent of Police and Collector because
by the date of Application, the Applicant has not deposited the bid amount.
Therefore, at the first instance direction can be given to all concerned of the
Corporate Debtor Company to extend all cooperation to the Applicant. It is always
open to the Applicant to approach the Tribunal for suitable direction, if so required.
22. In the result, Application is disposed of directing the concerned of the Corporate
Debtor Company to extend all cooperation to the Applicant herein in implementing
the Resolution Plan and it is open to Resolution Applicant to approach the Tribunal
for necessary direction subsequent to this order, if so required.” (quoted verbatim)
3. In the common order dated 8th April 2019 in the aforesaid appeals, the Appellate Tribunal,
inter-alia, observed and held:-
“45. ‘M/s. Maharashtra Seamless Ltd.’ (‘Successful Resolution Applicant’) has taken plea that out of
verified claims of Rs.2,02,88,948/-, and is willing to pay the verified ‘Operational Creditors’ at the
same percentage as that of the ‘Financial Creditors’ i.e. 25% which shall be paid within 30 days of
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
2

the ‘Successful Resolution Applicant’ getting clear and unfettered possession of and rights to the
‘Corporate Debtor’. The 25% of verified claim of Rs.2,02,88,948/- is Rs. 50,72,237/- approximately,
therefore, even if such offer is accepted then it will be Rs.577,50,237/- i.e. Rs.578 Crores
approximately, which is also much less than the liquidation value of Rs.597.54 Crores.
46. Taking into consideration the nature of the case, we are of the view that ‘M/s. Maharashtra
Seamless Ltd.’ should increase upfront payment of Rs.477 Crores as proposed to the ‘Financial
Creditors’, ‘Operational Creditors’ and other Creditors to Rs.597.54 Crores by paying additional Rs.
120.54 Crores approximately to make it at par with the average liquidation value of Rs.597.54
Crores. If the upfront amount is increased to Rs.597.54 Crores, the total amount should be
distributed amongst the ‘Financial Creditors’ and the ‘Operational Creditors’ at same ratio as
suggested. As per suggestion of the ‘Resolution Applicant’, the ‘Operational Creditors’ can be given
same percentage of amount as allocated to the ‘Financial Creditors’.
47. If the ‘Resolution Applicant’ fails to undertake the payment of additional amount of Rs.120.54
Crores in addition to Rs.477 Crores thereby raising it to Rs.597.54 Crores (total) and deposit the
amount in the Escrow Account within 30 days in such case, the impugned order of approval of the
‘Resolution Plan’ be treated to be set aside. Thereafter, the Adjudicating Authority will pass
appropriate order in accordance with law.” (quoted verbatim)
4. So far as the appeal of MSL before the Appellate Authority is concerned, the same had direct
correlation with the other two appeals. In this appeal, it was held and observed by the NCLAT:-
“54. In the present case, we find that the ‘Resolution Plan’ is against the statement
and object of the ‘I&B Code’ and, therefore, we have directed M/s. Maharashtra
Seamless Limited’ to modify the plan. Till the plan is modified, as ordered above,
‘M/s. Maharashtra Seamless Limited’ cannot take over the ‘Corporate Debtor’
without complying with the direction as given and recorded above.
55. However, it does not mean that the Promoters/ Ex-Directors will create
hindrance in the matter of taking over the premises and plant of the ‘Corporate
Debtor’ which for the present should be taken over by the ‘Resolution Professional’.
The Adjudicating Authority will direct the ‘Resolution Professional’ to take over the
possession of the plant and offices and other premises and assets of the ‘Corporate
Debtor’ to ensure that the assets remain intact till the plan is improved by the
‘Resolution Applicant’ in a manner as directed above. For taking over such
possession, the Adjudicating Authority will direct the concerned District Collector
and the Superintendent of Police of the District to provide necessary force to enable
the ‘Resolution Professional’ to take over the premises and plant of the ‘Corporate
Debtor’ and all the moveable and immoveable assets.
56. If the ‘Resolution Applicant’ modifies the ‘Resolution Plan’, as ordered above and
deposits another sum of Rs.120.54 Crores within 30 days, by improving the plan, the
Adjudicating Authority will allow ‘M/s. Maharashtra Seamless Limited’ to take over
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
3

the possession of the ‘Corporate Debtor’ including its moveable and immoveable
assets and the plant. On failure, the plan approved in favour of ‘M/s. Maharashtra
Seamless Ltd.’ deemed to be set aside and the Adjudicating Authority will pass
appropriate order in accordance with law.” (quoted verbatim)
5. There is an application registered as I.A. No. 115118 of 2019, taken out by MSL in connection with
their own appeal before us. In this application, they have, in substance, sought refund of the sum
deposited in terms of the resolution plan alongwith interest. In this application, MSL has also
applied for withdrawal of the resolution plan. Their grievance is that in order to take over the
corporate debtor, they had availed of substantial term loan facility and deposited the sum of Rs.477
crores for resolution of the corporate debtor in a designated escrow account on 19th February, 2019
but because of delay in implementation of the resolution plan, they were compelled to bear the
interest burden. It is also their case that the export orders they had accepted in anticipation of
successful implementation of the resolution plan were cancelled as a result of which takeover of the
corporate debtor had become unworkable.
6. The application of the Indian Bank under Section 7 of the Code was filed on 12th June 2017. An
Interim Resolution Professional was appointed initially, who was changed later in the proceeding.
The Resolution Professional on 10th January, 2018, issued invitation calling applications from
interested parties by 28 th February, 2018. This timeline was subsequently extended from time to
time, and altogether four resolution plans were placed before the Committee of Creditors (CoC).
This Committee was constituted on 18th August 2017 by the Interim Resolution Professional. One of
these plans was by MSL. The other Resolution Applicant whose offer was considered was M/s. Area
Projects Consultants Private Limited. MSL had offered upfront payment of Rs.477 crores. The
resolution plan of MSL was approved by the financial creditors having 87.10% of the voting shares.
This voting block consisted of the two aforesaid Deutsche Bank entities. The Deutsche Bank
International (Asia) Limited had 73.40% vote share and the Indian Bank had 12.90% voting share in
CoC.
7. Two registered valuers being K. Vijay Bhasker Reddy and P. Madhu were initially appointed for
determining the value of the corporate debtor. Their valuations were to the tune of Rs.681 crores
and Rs.513 crores respectively. On account of substantial difference in their valuations, the
Committee appointed a third valuer, Duff and Phelps. They valued the Corporate debtor at Rs.352
crores. The Committee thereafter took into consideration the average of the two closest estimates of
valuation by P. Madhu and Duff and Phelps and liquidation value was assessed to be Rs.432.92
crores.
8. Subsequently, an application was filed before the Adjudicating Authority by the Resolution
Professional in which he sought approval of the resolution plan. That application was disposed of by
the Adjudicating Authority by an order passed on 28 th September, 2018, inter-alia, directing the
Resolution Professional to re-determine the liquidation value of the corporate debtor by taking into
consideration the first and second valuation of P. Madhu and K. Vijay Bhaskar. It was, inter alia,
directed in this order of 28th September, 2018:-
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
4

“(2) The Resolution Professional shall convene a meeting of CoC to place the
qualified Resolution Plans along with Resolution Plan of MSL before CoC for
reconsideration, in the light of revised liquidation value of the Corporate Debtor
Company. (3) 30 days’ time is excluded from the CIRP period with effect from today
for completing the above direction.
(4) The Resolution Professional is directed to allow Directors / Suspended Board to
participate in the CoC meetings and permit them to express their views and
suggestions and record the same in the Minutes of the meeting of the CoC.”
9. Revised valuation of the corporate debtor was made, enhancing the same to Rs.597.54 crores
from Rs.432.92 crores. In its 9th meeting held on 16th October, 2018, the Committee took into
consideration the revised valuation and on majority voting approved again the resolution plan of
MSL. The directors of suspended Board were given opportunity to express their views and
suggestions before the Committee.
10. The order of the Adjudicating Authority passed on 28th September 2018 was appealed against
by MSL before NCLAT. This appeal was registered as Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.637 of
2018. That appeal was disposed of by the Tribunal on 12 th November 2018 with the following
observation and direction:-
“Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the member of the ‘Committee of Creditors’
submits that during the pendency of this appeal in compliance of the order of the
Adjudicating Authority, revised liquidation value was taken into consideration by the
‘Committee of Creditors’ whereinafter the ‘resolution plan of the appellant’ –
‘Maharashtra Seamless Ltd.’ has been approved. It is also accepted by the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the ‘Resolution Professional’ and the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant. In view of the aforesaid position, we are not
inclined to deliberate on the question as raised in the present appeal, which may be
answered in some other case. The Adjudicating Authority is now required to pass
order under Section 31 of the I&B Code without granting unnecessary adjournments
to any of the party uninfluenced by its earlier order, which is under challenge. The
appeal is disposed of with aforesaid observations and directions.” (quoted verbatim)
11. Before disposal of Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.637 of 2018, on 25th October 2018 the
resolution professional had filed an application (I.A.No.472/2018) before the Adjudicating
Authority seeking approval of the resolution plan as per the decision in the 9 th meeting of the
committee held on 16th October 2018. We have referred to the outcome of the said meeting earlier
in this judgment. The order of the Adjudicating Authority was issued on 21st January 2019
approving the resolution plan upon considering Section 31 of the 2016 Code. The Adjudicating
Authority, inter-alia, held and observed:-
“27. The Resolution Professional has filed the present Application enclosing the
minutes of 9 th CoC. The question whether the plan submitted by M/s MSL is in
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
5

conformity with Section 30 (2) of the Code. If it is in conformity, then the plan is to
be approved under Section 31 of the Code. The CoC has examined all eligible
resolution plans again in the 9th CoC meeting held on 16.10.2018. The Resolution
Plan submitted by M/s MSL is below the revised Liquidation Value. The difference is
about Rs.120 crores. However, as per directions of the Hon’ble NCLAT, this Tribunal
to decide the plan filed by M/s. MSL without being influenced by its previous order.
28. The CoC has approved the Resolution Plan submitted by M/s MSL with a
majority of voting share of Financial Creditors at 87.10%. The CoC in its wisdom has
approved the Plan. No doubt Indian Bank, the other Financial Creditor having voting
share at 12.90% opposed for approval of the Resolution Plan. The minimum required
percentage of voting for approval of the Resolution Plan as per the latest amendment
is 66%. In this case, the Resolution Plan with voting share of 87.10 of the Financial
Creditors approved the plan.
29. The other contention raised that upfront payment is below the revised liquidation
value and therefore, the Plan could not be accepted. On the other hand, Hon’ble
NCLAT has held in Company Appeal No.637/2018 that this Tribunal to decide the
Application under Section 31 of IBC without being influenced by the previous order.
When such is the case, the revised Liquidation value has no role to pay while
considering the Resolution Plan submitted by M/s MSL. The Tribunal has to test the
Resolution Plan with reference to provisions of Section 30 (2) of IBC. The Resolution
Professional certified that Plan of M/s MSL is in conformity with provisions of
Section 30 (2) of the Code. So, the Liquidation Value prior to re-determination if
taken into account, the upfront payment offered by M/s MSL is over and above the
Liquidation Value. Therefore, the objection taken by the Director (Suspended Board)
and also Indian Bank could not be taken into account in view of the direction of
Hon’ble NCLAT.
30. The next contention raised that the Resolution Applicant has not obtained prior
approval of the CCI as required under Section 31 (4) of the Code. The Counsel for
Resolution Professional would contend that there is no need to obtain prior approval
of CCI as the plan submitted by M/s MSL does not fall under the provisions of CCI.
The Director (Suspended Board) has raised the same in the 9th CoC meeting and it is
answered that such approval is not necessary. Even otherwise Section 31(4) provides
that necessary approval required under any law for the time being in force is to be
obtained by Resolution Applicant within a period of one year or within the prescribed
period under such law. Therefore, Resolution Applicant can obtain necessary
approvals in a period of one year if it is required. Thus, the Resolution Plan of M/s
MSL filed by Resolution Professional is to be approved as it meets all the
requirements of Section 30 (2) of IBC.
31. In the result, the Resolution plan submitted by M/s Maharashtra Seamless
Limited is approved and that the same shall be binding on the Corporate Debtor and
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
6

its employees, members, creditors, guarantors and other stakeholders involved in the
Resolution Plan.
32. The revival plan of the company in accordance with the approved resolution plan
shall come into force with immediate effect. The moratorium order passed by this
Tribunal under Section 14 shall cease to have vacated.
33. The resolution professional shall forward all records relating to the conduct of the
corporate insolvency resolution process and the resolution plan to the IBBI to be
recorded on its database.
34. CA No. 472/2018 in CP (IB) No.49/7HBD/2017 is disposed of in terms of the
above.” (quoted verbatim)
12. The complaint of Padmanabhan Venkatesh, one of the original promoters and the Bank before
the NCLAT was primarily on the ground that the approval of resolution plan amounting to Rs.477
crores was giving the Resolution Applicant windfall as they would get assets valued at Rs.597.54
crores at much lower amount. The other ground urged by the Bank was that the Area Projects
Consultants Private Limited, one of the Resolution Applicants had made revised offer of Rs.490
crores, which was more than the amount offered by the MSL. In course of the hearing of the appeal,
it appears that the successful Resolution Applicant had indicated infusion of more funds, which was
taken into consideration by the NCLAT. This would appear from the following passage of the order
of the NCLAT under appeal before us:-
“24. It was submitted that actually the total exposure of the ‘Successful Resolution
Applicant’ is around Rs.657.50 Crores although Rs. 477 Crores is upfront amount. In
addition to that Rs. 180.50 Crores which would be infused directly in the ‘Corporate
Debtor’ by ‘M/s. Maharashtra Seamless Ltd.’- (4th Respondent). Further, Rs. 57
Crores would be infused towards 25% margin money of working capital expenditure.
Moreover, in fact, the total working capital Rs. 224 Crores, the balance to be taken as
loan from Bank(s), which would also require Corporate Guarantees of the 4th
Respondent.
25. It was further contended that the ‘Corporate Debtor’ plant has been lying closed
for the last three years. Additionally, in all its operational life prior thereto, the
‘Corporate Debtor’ over a period of seven years could not produce even a total of
1,50,000 MT, which is supposed to be its production capacity of one year. Thus, it
was only after due and in-depth consideration, including taking into account
extensive further investments, which would mandatorily have to be made to get the
Corporate Debtor’ up and running, that the ‘Successful Resolution Applicant’ offered
Rs. 477 Crores, which was payable within 30 days of the approval of the plan.
26. Therefore, according to counsel for 4 th Respondent, the aforesaid infusion of
funds by the 4th Respondent aggregating Rs.657.50 Crores is for the maximization of
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
7

the assets of the ‘Corporate Debtor’.” (quoted verbatim)
13. The NCLAT, however, found the reasoning of the Adjudicating Authority flawed, inter-alia, for
the following reasons:-
“34. Therefore, it is clear that the ‘Committee of Creditors’ has also accepted the
average of the liquidation value which comes to Rs. 597.54 Crores and on the basis of
which the ‘Resolution Plan’ was considered. If the ‘Resolution Plan’ is considered,
then it will be evident that 25% of the admitted dues of the ‘Financial Creditors’ have
been allowed in the ‘Resolution Plan’. On the other hand, the ‘Operational Creditors’
have been discriminated. The liquidation value being Rs.597.54 Crores, the upfront
payment suggested by the ‘Resolution Applicant’ being less i.e., Rs. 477 Crores, the
payment to the ‘Operational Creditors’ is lower than the proportionate liquidation
value, therefore, the ‘Resolution Plan’, as approved by the Adjudicating Authority is
against Section 30(2) (b) of the ‘I&B Code’.” (quoted verbatim) We have reproduced
the final finding and directions of the NCLAT earlier in this judgment.
14. The appeal of MSL argued by Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel, is mainly on the ground
that the NCLAT had exceeded its jurisdiction in directing matching of liquidation value in the
resolution plan. MSL in the appeal have sought to sustain the resolution plan but their prayer in the
interlocutory application is refund of the amount remitted coupled with the plea of withdrawal of
resolution plan. However, their main case in the appeal is that final decision on resolution plan
should be left to the commercial wisdom of the Committee of Creditors and there is no requirement
that resolution plan should match the maximized asset value of the corporate debtors. On the other
hand, Mr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for two main financial
creditors, while supporting the main appeal of Mr. Sibal has resisted the plea for withdrawal of the
resolution plan and refund of the sum already remitted by Mr. Sibal’s clients. Mr. Singhvi has
highlighted the fact that the exposure of his clients to the total debt of the corporate debtors is
Rs.2060 crores and his clients being the primary creditors to the tune of 87.10% of the total dues, it
was his clients who would have suffered loss, if any, on account of resolution plan not matching the
liquidation value.
15. On the aspect of withdrawal of the plan, Mr. Singhvi has referred to Section 12-A of the 2016
Code. His submission is that the only route through which a resolution applicant can travel back
after admission of the resolution plan is the aforesaid provision. Section 12-A of the 2016 Code
stipulates:-
“12A. Withdrawal of application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10. – The
Adjudicating Authority may allow the withdrawal of application admitted under
section 7 or section 9 or section 10, on an application made by the applicant with the
approval of ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors, in such
manner as may be specified.”
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
8

16. It is admitted position that approximately Rs.472 crores have been remitted to the financial
creditors which was received from Mr. Sibal’s clients. The D.B. International Asia Limited, having
73.40% voting shares in the CoC has also assailed the impugned order on grounds similar to that
taken by the MSL.
17. We shall address two issues in this appeal. The first one is whether the scheme of the Code
contemplates that the sum forming part of the resolution plan should match the liquidation value or
not. The second question we shall deal with is as to whether Section 12-A is the applicable route
through which a successful Resolution Applicant can retreat. Before we proceed to answer these two
questions, we must indicate that before the Appellate Authority substantial argument was advanced
over failure on the part of the Adjudicating Authority to maintain parity between the financial
creditors and operational creditors on the aspect of clearing dues.
18. Section 30 (2) (b) of the Code specifies the manner in which a resolution plan shall provide for
payment to the operational creditors. The provisions of Section 30 of the Code is reproduced below:-
“30. Submission of resolution plan. – (1) A resolution applicant may submit a
resolution plan along with an affidavit stating that he is eligible under section 29A to
the resolution professional prepared on the basis of the information memorandum.
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each resolution plan received by him to
confirm that each resolution plan—
(a) provides for the payment of insolvency resolution process costs in a manner
specified by the Board in priority to the payment of other debts of the corporate
debtor;
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational creditors in such manner as may
be specified by the Board which shall not be less than-
(i) the amount to be paid to such creditors in the event of a liquidation of the
corporate debtor under section 53; or
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such creditors, if the amount to be
distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with the
order of priority in sub-section (1) of section 53, whichever is higher, and provides for
the payment of debts of financial creditors, who do not vote in favour of the
resolution plan, in such manner as may be specified by the Board, which shall not be
less than the amount to be paid to such creditors in accordance with sub-section (1)
of section 53 in the event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor.
Explanation 1. — For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a distribution in accordance with
the provisions of this clause shall be fair and equitable to such creditors.
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
9

Explanation 2. — For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby declared that on and from the date of
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019, the provisions of
this clause shall also apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor-
(i) where a resolution plan has not been approved or rejected by the Adjudicating
Authority;
(ii) where an appeal has been preferred under section 61 or section 62 or such an
appeal is not time barred under any provision of law for the time being in force; or
(iii) where a legal proceeding has been initiated in any court against the decision of
the Adjudicating Authority in respect of a resolution plan;
(c) provides for the management of the affairs of the Corporate debtor after approval of the
resolution plan;
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution plan;
(e) does not contravene any of the provisions of the law for the time being in force;
(f) conforms to such other requirements as may be specified by the Board.
Explanation. — For the purposes of clause (e), if any approval of shareholders is required under the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or any other law for the time being in force for the
implementation of actions under the resolution plan, such approval shall be deemed to have been
given and it shall not be a contravention of that Act or law.
(3) The resolution professional shall present to the committee of creditors for its approval such
resolution plans which confirm the conditions referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The committee of creditors may approve a resolution plan by a vote of not less than sixty-six per
cent. of voting share of the financial creditors, after considering its feasibility and viability, the
manner of distribution proposed, which may take into account the order of priority amongst
creditors as laid down in sub-section (1) of section 53, including the priority and value of the security
interest of a secured creditor and such other requirements as may be specified by the Board:
Provided that the committee of creditors shall not approve a resolution plan,
submitted before the commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2017, where the resolution applicant is ineligible under
section 29A and may require the resolution professional to invite a fresh resolution
plan where no other resolution plan is available with it:
Provided further that where the resolution applicant referred to in the first proviso is
ineligible under clause (c) of section 29A, the resolution applicant shall be allowed by
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
10

the committee of creditors such period, not exceeding thirty days, to make payment
of overdue amounts in accordance with the proviso to clause (c) of section 29A:
Provided also that nothing in the second proviso shall be construed as extension of
period for the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 12, and the
corporate insolvency resolution process shall be completed within the period
specified in that sub-section.”.
Provided also that the eligibility criteria in section 29A as amended by the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018 shall apply to the resolution
applicant who has not submitted resolution plan as on the date of commencement of
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018.
(5) The resolution applicant may attend the meeting of the committee of creditors in
which the resolution plan of the applicant is considered:
Provided that the resolution applicant shall not have a right to vote at the meeting of
the committee of creditors unless such resolution applicant is also a financial
creditor.
(6) The resolution professional shall submit the resolution plan as approved by the
committee of creditors to the Adjudicating Authority.”
19. The manner in which the claims of the operational creditors shall be considered in a CIRP has
been dealt with by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court (of which two of us, Nariman J. and
Ramasubramanian J. were members) in the case of Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India
Limited vs. Satish Kumar Gupta, decided on 15th November, 2019 in Civil Appeal Nos. 8766-8767 of
2019 (2019 SCC OnLine SC 1478). It has been held in paragraph 53 of this judgment in the said
report:-
“53. However, as has been correctly argued on behalf of the operational creditors, the
preamble of the Code does speak of maximisation of the value of assets of corporate
debtors and the balancing of the interests of all stakeholders. There is no doubt that a
key objective of the Code is to ensure that the corporate debtor keeps operating as a
going concern during the insolvency resolution process and must therefore make past
and present payments to various operational creditors without which such operation
as a going concern would become impossible. Sections 5(26), 14(2), 20(1), 20(2)(d)
and (e) of the Code read with Regulations 37 and 38 of the 2016 Regulations all speak
of the corporate debtor running as a going concern during the insolvency resolution
process. Workmen need to be paid, electricity dues need to be paid, purchase of raw
materials need to be made, etc. This is in fact reflected in this court’s judgment in
Swiss Ribbons (supra) as follows:-
“26. The Preamble of the Code states as follows:
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
11

“An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency
resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time-bound
manner for maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote
entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the
stakeholders including alteration in the order of priority of payment of government
dues and to establish an Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
27. As is discernible, the Preamble gives an insight into what is sought to be achieved
by the Code. The Code is first and foremost, a Code for reorganisation and insolvency
resolution of corporate debtors. Unless such reorganisation is effected in a
time-bound manner, the value of the assets of such persons will deplete. Therefore,
maximisation of value of the assets of such persons so that they are efficiently run as
going concerns is another very important objective of the Code.
This, in turn, will promote entrepreneurship as the persons in management of the corporate debtor
are removed and replaced by entrepreneurs. When, therefore, a resolution plan takes off and the
corporate debtor is brought back into the economic mainstream, it is able to repay its debts, which,
in turn, enhances the viability of credit in the hands of banks and financial institutions. Above all,
ultimately, the interests of all stakeholders are looked after as the corporate debtor itself becomes a
beneficiary of the resolution scheme— workers are paid, the creditors in the long run will be repaid
in full, and shareholders/investors are able to maximise their investment. Timely resolution of a
corporate debtor who is in the red, by an effective legal framework, would go a long way to support
the development of credit markets. Since more investment can be made with funds that have come
back into the economy, business then eases up, which leads, overall, to higher economic growth and
development of the Indian economy. What is interesting to note is that the Preamble does not, in
any manner, refer to liquidation, which is only availed of as a last resort if there is either no
resolution plan or the resolution plans submitted are not up to the mark. Even in liquidation, the
liquidator can sell the business of the corporate debtor as a going concern. (See ArcelorMittal
[ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1] at para 83, fn 3).” (emphasis
supplied) “54. This is the reason why Regulation 38(1A) speaks of a resolution plan including a
statement as to how it has dealt with the interests of all stakeholders, including operational creditors
of the corporate debtor. Regulation 38(1) also states that the amount due to operational creditors
under a resolution plan shall be given priority in payment over financial creditors. If nothing is to be
paid to operational creditors, the minimum, being liquidation value - which in most cases would
amount to nil after secured creditors have been paid
- would certainly not balance the interest of all stakeholders or maximise the value of assets of a
corporate debtor if it becomes impossible to continue running its business as a going concern. Thus,
it is clear that when the Committee of Creditors exercises its commercial wisdom to arrive at a
business decision to revive the corporate debtor, it must necessarily take into account these key
features of the Code before it arrives at a commercial decision to pay off the dues of financial and
operational creditors. There is no doubt whatsoever that the ultimate discretion of what to pay and
how much to pay each class or subclass of creditors is with the Committee of Creditors, but, the
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
12

decision of such Committee must reflect the fact that it has taken into account maximising the value
of the assets of the corporate debtor and the fact that it has adequately balanced the interests of all
stakeholders including operational creditors. This being the case, judicial review of the Adjudicating
Authority that the resolution plan as approved by the Committee of Creditors has met the
requirements referred to in Section 30(2) would include judicial review that is mentioned in Section
30(2)(e), as the provisions of the Code are also provisions of law for the time being in force. Thus,
while the Adjudicating Authority cannot interfere on merits with the commercial decision taken by
the Committee of Creditors, the limited judicial review available is to see that the Committee of
Creditors has taken into account the fact that the corporate debtor needs to keep going as a going
concern during the insolvency resolution process; that it needs to maximise the value of its assets;
and that the interests of all stakeholders including operational creditors has been taken care of. If
the Adjudicating Authority finds, on a given set of facts, that the aforesaid parameters have not been
kept in view, it may send a resolution plan back to the Committee of Creditors to re-submit such
plan after satisfying the aforesaid parameters. The reasons given by the Committee of Creditors
while approving a resolution plan may thus be looked at by the Adjudicating Authority only from
this point of view, and once it is satisfied that the Committee of Creditors has paid attention to these
key features, it must then pass the resolution plan, other things being equal.”
20. It has been further been held in the case of Essar Steel (supra):-
“124. The other argument of Shri Sibal that Section 53 of the Code would be
applicable only during liquidation and not at the stage of resolving insolvency is
correct. Section 30(2)(b) of the Code refers to Section 53 not in the context of priority
of payment of creditors, but only to provide for a minimum payment to operational
creditors. However, this again does not in any manner limit the Committee of
Creditors from classifying creditors as financial or operational and as secured or
unsecured. Full freedom and discretion has been given, as has been seen
hereinabove, to the Committee of Creditors to so classify creditors and to pay secured
creditors amounts which can be based upon the value of their security, which they
would otherwise be able to realise outside the process of the Code, thereby stymying
the corporate resolution process itself.”
21. Submission of the respondents supporting the impugned order of NCLAT has been in reference
to Section 30(2)(b) of the 2016 Code. We have taken note of submission made by Mr. Singhvi that
the operational creditors of the corporate debtor come way down in the priority list for distribution
of assets under Section 53 of the Code in forming our opinion over applicability of clause 38(1) of
the 2016 Regulations expressed in the previous paragraph. But on this point, a clear guidance comes
from the decision of co-ordinate Bench in the case of Essar Steel (supra) on the point of dealing with
the claims of operational creditors. It has also been held in that judgment in paragraph 70 of the
said report:-
“70. By reading paragraph 77 de hors the earlier paragraphs, the Appellate Tribunal
has fallen into grave error. Paragraph 76 clearly refers to the UNCITRAL Legislative
Guide which makes it clear beyond any doubt that equitable treatment is only of
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
13

similarly situated creditors. This being so, the observation in paragraph 77 cannot be
read to mean that financial and operational creditors must be paid the same amounts
in any resolution plan before it can pass muster. On the contrary, paragraph 77 itself
makes it clear that there is a difference in payment of the debts of financial and
operational creditors, operational creditors having to receive a minimum payment,
being not less than liquidation value, which does not apply to financial creditors. The
amended Regulation 38 set out in paragraph 77 again does not lead to the conclusion
that financial and operational creditors, or secured and unsecured creditors, must be
paid the same amounts, percentage wise, under the resolution plan before it can pass
muster. Fair and equitable dealing of operational creditors’ rights under the said
Regulation involves the resolution plan stating as to how it has dealt with the
interests of operational creditors, which is not the same thing as saying that they
must be paid the same amount of their debt proportionately. Also, the fact that the
operational creditors are given priority in payment over all financial creditors does
not lead to the conclusion that such payment must necessarily be the same recovery
percentage as financial creditors. So long as the provisions of the Code and the
Regulations have been met, it is the commercial wisdom of the requisite majority of
the Committee of Creditors which is to negotiate and accept a resolution plan, which
may involve differential payment to different classes of creditors, together with
negotiating with a prospective resolution applicant for better or different terms which
may also involve differences in distribution of amounts between different classes of
creditors.”
22. But the controversy on there being no provision in the resolution plan for operational creditors
is only academic now. Before the Appellate Authority itself the successful Resolution Applicant had
agreed to clear the dues of the operational creditors in percentage at par with the financial creditors.
Moreover, none of the operational creditors has come before us questioning the legality of the
resolution plan. It would appear from para 29 of the order under appeal:
“29. It was submitted that the claims received of the ‘Operational Creditors’ by the
Respondent No.1 were to the tune of Rs.2,26,70,153/- whereas the claims verified
were of Rs.2,02,88,948/-. However, it was submitted that the 4th Respondent is
willing to pay the verified ‘Operational Creditors’ at the same percentage as that of
the ‘Financial Creditors’, i.e. 25%, which shall be paid within 30 days of the
‘Successful Resolution Applicant’ getting clear and unfettered possession of and
rights to the ‘Corporate Debtor’.” (quoted verbatim)
23. The Adjudicating Authority has primarily relied on Section 31 of the Code in approving the
resolution plan. The said provision reads:
“31. Approval of resolution plan. – (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that
the resolution plan as approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section (4)
of section 30 meets the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it
shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be binding on the corporate
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
14

debtor and its employees, members, creditors, including the Central Government,
any State Government or any local authority to whom a debt in respect of the
payment of dues arising under any law for the time being in force, such as authorities
to whom statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other stakeholders involved in the
resolution plan.
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for approval
of resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy that the resolution plan has
provisions for its effective implementation.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does not
confirm to the requirements referred to in sub-section (1), it may, by an order, reject
the resolution plan. (3) After the order of approval under sub-section (1),—
(a) the moratorium order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under section 14 shall
cease to have effect; and
(b) the resolution professional shall forward all records relating to the conduct of the
corporate insolvency resolution process and the resolution plan to the Board to be
recorded on its database.
(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan approved under
sub-section (1), obtain the necessary approval required under any law for the time
being in force within a period of one year from the date of approval of the resolution
plan by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (1) or within such period as
provided for in such law, whichever is later.
Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for combination, as referred to in
section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002, the resolution applicant shall obtain the approval of the
Competition Commission of India under that Act prior to the approval of such resolution plan by the
committee of creditors.”
24. On behalf of the Indian Bank and the said promoter of the corporate debtor, reliance was placed
on Clause 35 of The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for
Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016:
“35. Liquidation value. (1) Liquidation value is the estimated realizable value of the
assets of the corporate debtor if the corporate debtor were to be liquidated on the
insolvency commencement date. (2) Liquidation value shall be determined in the
following manner:
(a) the two registered valuers appointed under Regulation 27 shall submit to the
interim resolution professional or the resolution professional, as the case may be, an
estimate of the liquidation value computed in accordance with internationally
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
15

accepted valuation standards, after physical verification of the inventory and fixed
assets of the corporate debtor;
(b) if in the opinion of the interim resolution professional or the resolution
professional, as the case may be, the two estimates are significantly different, he may
appoint another registered valuer who shall submit an estimate computed in the
same manner; and
(c) the average of the two closest estimates shall be considered the liquidation value.
(3) The resolution professional shall provide the liquidation value to the committee in
electronic form.”
25. Now the question arises as to whether, while approving a resolution plan, the Adjudicating
Authority could reassess a resolution plan approved by the Committee of Creditors, even if the same
otherwise complies with the requirement of Section 31 of the Code. Learned counsel appearing for
the Indian Bank and the said erstwhile promoter of the corporate debtor have emphasised that there
could be no reason to release property valued at Rs.597.54 crores to MSL for Rs.477 crores. Learned
counsel appearing for these two respondents have sought to strengthen their submission on this
point referring to the other Resolution Applicant whose bid was for Rs.490 crores which is more
than that of the appellant MSL.
26. No provision in the Code or Regulations has been brought to our notice under which the bid of
any Resolution Applicant has to match liquidation value arrived at in the manner provided in Clause
35 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency Resolution Process for Corporate
Persons) Regulations, 2016. This point has been dealt with in the case of Essar Steel (supra). We
have quoted above the relevant passages from this judgment.
27. It appears to us that the object behind prescribing such valuation process is to assist the CoC to
take decision on a resolution plan properly. Once, a resolution plan is approved by the CoC, the
statutory mandate on the Adjudicating Authority under Section 31(1) of the Code is to ascertain that
a resolution plan meets the requirement of sub-sections (2) and (4) of Section 30 thereof. We, per
se, do not find any breach of the said provisions in the order of the Adjudicating Authority in
approving the resolution plan.
28. The Appellate Authority has, in our opinion, proceeded on equitable perception rather than
commercial wisdom. On the face of it, release of assets at a value 20% below its liquidation value
arrived at by the valuers seems inequitable. Here, we feel the Court ought to cede ground to the
commercial wisdom of the creditors rather than assess the resolution plan on the basis of
quantitative analysis. Such is the scheme of the Code. Section 31(1) of the Code lays down in clear
terms that for final approval of a resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority has to be satisfied that
the requirement of sub-section (2) of Section 30 of the Code has been complied with. The proviso to
Section 31(1) of the Code stipulates the other point on which an Adjudicating Authority has to be
satisfied. That factor is that the resolution plan has provisions for its implementation. The scope of
interference by the Adjudicating Authority in limited judicial review has been laid down in the case
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
16

of Essar Steel (supra), the relevant passage (para 54) of which we have reproduced in earlier part of
this judgment. The case of MSL in their appeal is that they want to run the company and infuse
more funds. In such circumstances, we do not think the Appellate Authority ought to have interfered
with the order of the Adjudicating Authority in directing the successful Resolution Applicant to
enhance their fund inflow upfront.
29. So far as the IA taken out by the MSL is concerned, in our opinion they cannot withdraw from
the proceeding in the manner they have approached this Court. The exit route prescribed in Section
12-A is not applicable to a Resolution Applicant. The procedure envisaged in the said provision only
applies to applicants invoking Sections 7, 9 and 10 of the code. In this case, having appealed against
the NCLAT order with the object of implementing the resolution plan, MSL cannot be permitted to
take a contrary stand in an application filed in connection with the very same appeal. Moreover,
MSL has raised the funds upon mortgaging the assets of the corporate debtor only. In such
circumstances, we are not engaging in the judicial exercise of determining the question as to
whether after having been successful in a CIRP, an applicant altogether forfeits their right to
withdraw from such process or not.
30. Certain allegations were made by the MSL over failure on the part of the Resolution Professional
in taking possession of the assets of the corporate debtor and subsequently in their failure in
handing over the same to MSL. These issues are factual. Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior
counsel appearing for the Resolution Professional disputed such allegations. The order of the
NCLAT does not deal with this aspect of the controversy and we do not think we, in exercise of our
jurisdiction under Section 62 of the Code ought to engage ourselves in determining that question.
31. We, accordingly, allow the appeal of MSL and set aside the order of the NCLAT under appeal
before us. The order of the Adjudicating Authority passed on 21st January 2019 is affirmed. MSL,
however, shall remit additional sum of Rs.50,72,237/- to the Resolution Professional for further
remittance to the operational creditors as per their dues. This sum has already been offered to the
operational creditors, as recorded in the impugned order. We dismiss the I.A.No.115118 of 2019
taken out in connection with C.A.No.4242 of 2019. C.A.No.4967-68 of 2019 are also allowed on the
same reasoning. In view of our aforesaid findings and these directions, we are not going into the
question as to whether any illegality was committed by MSL as regards change in composition of
Board of Directors of the corporate debtor.
32. We, accordingly, direct the Resolution Professional to take physical possession of the assets of
the corporate debtor and hand it over to the MSL (appellant in C.A.No.4242 of 2019) within a period
of four weeks. The police and administrative authorities are directed to render assistance to the
Resolution Professional to enable him to carry out these directions.
33. All interim orders stand dissolved and connected applications are disposed of.
34. There shall be no order as to costs.
……………………………. J.
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
17

(Rohinton Fali Nariman) ……………………………. J.
(Aniruddha Bose) ……………………………. J.
(V. Ramasubramanian) New Delhi.
Dated: January 22, 2020.
Maharashtra Seamless Limited vs Padmanabhan Venkatesh on 22 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5839676/
18
