Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5
March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1297, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
333
Author: R. Banumathi
Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, A.S. Bopanna, R. Banumathi
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     ARBITRATION PETITION NO. 32 OF 2018
                         MANKASTU IMPEX PRIVATE LIMITED                            ...Pe
                                                       VERSUS
                         AIRVISUAL LIMITED                                     …Responde
                                                    JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
This petition has been filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 read
with Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 read with the Appointment of Arbitrator
by the Chief Justice of India Scheme, 1996 seeking appointment of a sole arbitrator under Clause
17.2 of the Memorandum of Understanding dated 12.09.2016 between petitioner-Company
incorporated in India and respondent- incorporated under the laws of Hong Kong.
2. Brief facts of the case relevant for the purposes of this petition are as under:-
The petitioner-company incorporated in India conducts Date: 2020.03.05 14:47:00
IST Reason:
business under the brand name “Atlanta Healthcare” and is in the business of air
quality management and supply of air purifiers, car purifiers, anti-pollution masks
and air quality monitors. The respondent is a company incorporated under the laws
of Hong Kong and is in the business of manufacture and sale of air quality monitors
as well as air quality information. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated
12.09.2016 was entered into between the parties under which the respondent agreed
to sell to the petitioner the complete line of the respondent’s air quality monitors
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
1

products for onward sale. As per the terms of the agreement, the petitioner was
appointed as an exclusive distributor for the products for sale within India.
Additionally, non-exclusive rights were given to the petitioner qua distribution for
sales in Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal. This agreement was to continue for a
period of five years from the starting date, which date was to commence from the
date of delivery of the first lot of Air Quality monitors in India, i.e.
03.10.2016 or 01.11.2016, whichever was later. As per the petitioner, it has spent approximately
Rs.17,00,000/- in promoting and creating a brand value for the products in India. Further the
petitioner spent Rs.9,00,000/- towards promoting the products at over fifteen business events such
as Indo-German Natural Health Fair, India International Trade Fair, etc.
3. On 14.10.2017, the petitioner received an e-mail from one Mr. Charl Cater of IQAir AG (Proposed
respondent No.2) informing the petitioner that the respondent is a part of IQAir AG. Attached to the
e-mail was a letter dated 13.10.2017 by the CEO of IQAir AG stating that IQAir AG has acquired all
technology and the associated assets of the respondent. Further, the product of AirVisual Node has
been discontinued and the IQAir AG is in the process of relaunching a new and improved version
which will be rebranded as IQAir AirVisual Pro. The letter also stated that IQAir AG will not assume
any contracts or legal obligations of the respondent and will work on a case to case basis with
resellers to negotiate new contracts and that the IQAir AirVisual products will be made available
under separate dealer agreements.
4. The petitioner sent reply dated 15.10.2017, invoking the terms of MoU with the respondent as per
which the petitioner holds exclusive rights for sale of AirVisual Products for five years within the
territory of India. Further the petitioner stated as per the terms of the MoU, in the event of any take
out/buy out or change in shareholding of the entity, it was obligatory on the part of the respondent
to ensure that the party taking over the business/assets shall honour the contract on the same terms
and conditions and it is a deemed presumption that the acquisition of business/assets of the
respondent has been done keeping in view the existing liabilities and obligations.
5. On 31.10.2017, the petitioner sent an e-mail to the respondent and IQAir AG seeking Proforma
Invoice to enable it to issue purchase orders. In reply, it was reiterated by IQAir AG that they have
not assumed any legal obligations of the respondent. However, they offered to supply IQAir branded
AirVisual Pro to the petitioner under a new non-exclusive arrangement with a new wholesale price
of USD 172 per unit as against the original price of USD 110 per unit agreed upon between the
petitioner and the respondent. The petitioner thereafter sent several e-mails but no response was
received. On 08.12.2017, the petitioner issued a notice invoking the arbitration clause provided in
Clause 17 the MoU. The petitioner also proposed the name of Hon’ble Justice RC Chopra as the
arbitrator, subject to consent of the respondent and IQAir AG.
6. The petitioner filed a petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act before the
Delhi High Court on 11.12.2017 seeking directions against the respondent and IQAir AG to honour
the terms and conditions of the MoU dated 12.09.2016 and to allow the petitioner to continue acting
as the authorised distributor for the sale of all products in terms of the MoU and to injunct the
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
2

respondent and IQAir AG from terminating the MoU and from entering into any contract with third
parties for products which are the subject matter of the MoU. Vide interim order dated 28.02.2018,
the High Court restrained the respondent from selling any of its products in India. The petition filed
under Section 9 of the Act by the petitioner is still pending before the High Court.
7. In response to the petitioner’s notice dated 08.12.2017, invoking the arbitration clause, IQAir vide
its letter dated 15.12.2017, under its asset purchase agreement with the respondent, it has not
assumed any contractual and legal obligations and that the terms of the MoU were not enforceable
against IQAir AG. The respondent also sent its reply dated 05.01.2018 to the notice dated
08.12.2017 stating that Clause 17 of the MoU provides for arbitration administered and seated in
Hong Kong. The respondent averred that should the petitioner wish to resolve the dispute by
arbitration, they should refer the dispute to an arbitration institution in Hong Kong. Further, it was
stated that the respondent did not agree to ad hoc arbitration but clearly agreed to administered
arbitration in Hong Kong. It was in this backdrop, the petitioner filed petition under Section 11(6) of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act seeking appointment of Sole Arbitrator under Clause 17 of the
MoU.
8. According to the petitioner, the proposed arbitration between the Petitioner and the respondent
being an arbitration between a company registered in India under the Companies Act, 1956 and the
respondent – a body corporate which is incorporated under the laws of Hong Kong, is an
“International Commercial Arbitration” as per Section 2(1)(f) of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 having seat of arbitration in Delhi. In terms of Section 11(6) read with Section 11(9), the
petitioner therefore seeks appointment of arbitrator.
9. Mr. Vikas Dutta, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that Clause 17.1 of the MoU clearly
stipulates that the MoU is governed by the laws of India and the courts at New Delhi have the
jurisdiction. It was submitted that the petitioner and the respondent have only agreed Hong Kong as
the “Venue” of arbitration and Hong Kong is not the juridical seat of the arbitration. As to the
decision in the case of Union of India v. Hardy Exploration and Production (India) INC (2018) 7
SCC 374, the learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the ratio of the judgment clearly
postulates that a “venue” can become a “seat” only if – (i) no other condition is postulated; (ii) if a
condition precedent is attached to the term “place”, the said condition/indicia has to be satisfied
first for “venue” to be equivalent to “seat”. It was submitted that in view of clear Clause 17.1 where
the parties have clearly agreed that the MoU has to be governed by the laws of India and the courts
at New Delhi would have the jurisdiction, Part-I of the Act is applicable and hence, prayed for
appointment of sole arbitrator.
10. Mr. Ritin Rai, learned Senior counsel for the respondent has submitted that as per Clause 17.2 of
the MoU entered into between the parties, the place of arbitration shall be Hong Kong. Since the
place of arbitration is outside India, Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act has no
application to the present dispute. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the expression used in
Clause 17.2 which provides “the place of arbitration shall be Hong Kong”, in addition to also
providing that “all disputes arising out of the MoU shall be referred to and finally resolved and
administered in Hong Kong” clearly shows that the parties have agreed that the arbitration between
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
3

the parties would be seated in Hong Kong and therefore, Part-I is not applicable and Section 11 has
no application to the present dispute. The learned Senior counsel submitted that the petitioner is
required to approach the Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre and the Indian Courts have
no jurisdiction to entertain the petition for appointment of arbitrator.
11. On behalf of the respondent, much reliance was placed upon BGS SGS SOMA JV v. NHPC Ltd.
2019 (17) SCALE 369 to contend that the expression “arbitration proceedings” would make it clear
that the “venue” is really the “seat of arbitration proceedings” as the aforesaid expression does not
include just one or more single or part hearing but the arbitration proceedings as a whole including
making of the award at that place. It was submitted that in the present case, the word
“administered” used in Clause 17.2 of the MoU between the parties clearly shows that the parties
have agreed that the arbitration between the parties would be seated in Hong Kong.
12. In BGS Soma, the expression used was “….arbitration proceedings shall be held at New
Delhi/Faridabad”. In BGS Soma, the three-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court held that in all the
three appeals by the parties, proceedings were held at New Delhi and the awards were also signed at
New Delhi and not in Faridabad. The learned Bench held that in the absence of contrary expression
expressed by the parties, it leads to the conclusion that the parties have chosen New Delhi as the
seat of arbitration under Section 20(1) of the Arbitration Act. In BGS Soma, the Bench held that the
judgment in Hardy Exploration is contrary to the decision of the Constitution Bench judgment of
this Court in Bharat Aluminium Company v. Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc. (2012) 9 SCC
552 (BALCO) and therefore, cannot be considered good law.
13. Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that Hardy Exploration and BGS Soma, both
being by the three-Judges Bench, declaration by the later Bench that Hardy Exploration is not a god
law, may not tantamount to an overriding of Hardy Exploration. It was submitted that when both
the judgments were by Bench of equal strength, it was not open to the Bench rendering the decision
in BGS Soma to hold that the decision in Hardy Exploration was incorrect and the learned Bench in
BGS Soma ought to have referred the matter to larger Bench. To substantiate the contention, the
learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to Chandra Prakash and others v. State of U.P and
another (2002) 4 SCC 234 wherein this Court held that the doctrine of binding precedent is of
utmost importance in the administration of judicial system as it promotes certainty and consistency
in judicial decisions. However, considering Clause 17 of the MoU in the present case and the definite
clauses therein and in the facts and circumstances of the case, we are not inclined to go into the
question on the correctness of BGS Soma or otherwise.
14. The question falling for consideration in the present case is, in view of Clause 17.2 of the MoU
whether the parties have agreed that the seat of arbitration is at Hong Kong and whether this Court
lacks jurisdiction to entertain the present petition filed under Section 11 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.
15. The petitioner is a company incorporated in India; whereas the respondent is a company
incorporated under the laws of Hong Kong. Section 2(1)(f) of the Act defines “International
Commercial Arbitration”. As per Section 2(1)(f), to be an “International Commercial Arbitration”,
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
4

three factors ought to be fulfilled – (i) arbitration; (ii) considered as commercial under the laws in
force in India; and (iii) at least one of the parties is national or habitual resident in any country
other than India. In the present case, since the respondent is a company incorporated under the
laws of Hong Kong, we are concerned with “International Commercial Arbitration”.
16. As per Section 2(2), Part-I shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India. If the
“International Commercial Arbitration” is seated in India, then Part-I of the Act shall apply. The
interpretation of Section 2(2) of the Act was considered by the Constitution Bench in BALCO,
wherein it was held that Part-I of the Act would have no application to “International Commercial
Arbitrations” held outside India. In para (194) of the judgment, it was held as under:-
“194. …..Section 2(2) makes a declaration that Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 shall
apply to all arbitrations which take place within India. We are of the considered
opinion that Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would have no application to
international commercial arbitration held outside India. Therefore, such awards
would only be subject to the jurisdiction of the Indian courts when the same are
sought to be enforced in India in accordance with the provisions contained in Part II
of the Arbitration Act, 1996. ……”
17. In the present case, Clause 17 of the MoU is a relevant clause governing the law and dispute
resolution. Clause 17 reads as under:-
17. Governing Law and Dispute Resolution 17.1 This MoU is governed by the laws of
India, without regard to its conflicts of laws provisions and courts at New Delhi shall
have the jurisdiction.
17.2 Any dispute, controversy, difference or claim arising out of or relating to this
MoU, including the existence, validity, interpretation, performance, breach or
termination thereof or any dispute regarding non-contractual obligations arising out
of or relating to it shall be referred to and finally resolved by arbitration administered
in Hong Kong.
The place of arbitration shall be Hong Kong.
The number of arbitrators shall be one. The arbitration proceedings shall be conducted in English
language.
17.3 It is agreed that a party may seek provisional, injunctive, or equitable remedies, including but
not limited to preliminary injunctive relief, from a court having jurisdiction, before, during or after
the pendency of any arbitration proceeding.
18. The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that a perusal of Clause 17.1 of the MoU
makes it clear that the petitioner and the respondent have only agreed that the proper law of the
contract to be laws of India and the MoU is clearly silent on the proper law and the curial law of the
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
5

arbitration and therefore, Clause 17.1 would govern the proper law and the curial law. According to
the petitioner, there is no express or implied exclusion either in Clause 17 or under the entire MoU
of the non-applicability of the laws of India and/or the applicability of the laws of Hong Kong or any
other country. Contention of the petitioner is that in the absence of the clear stipulation as to the
proper law and curial law of the arbitration, laws of India should be taken as the proper law and
curial law under the MoU and under no circumstances, the terms in Clause 17.1 of the MoU be
undermined or diluted.
19. The seat of arbitration is a vital aspect of any arbitration proceedings. Significance of the seat of
arbitration is that it determines the applicable law when deciding the arbitration proceedings and
arbitration procedure as well as judicial review over the arbitration award. The situs is not just about
where an institution is based or where the hearings will be held. But it is all about which court would
have the supervisory power over the arbitration proceedings. In Enercon (India) Limited and others
v. Enercon GMBH and another (2014) 5 SCC 1, the Supreme Court held that “the location of the Seat
will determine the courts that will have exclusive jurisdiction to oversee the arbitration proceedings.
It was further held that the Seat normally carries with it the choice of that country’s
arbitration/curial law”.
20. It is well-settled that “seat of arbitration” and “venue of arbitration” cannot be used
inter-changeably. It has also been established that mere expression “place of arbitration” cannot be
the basis to determine the intention of the parties that they have intended that place as the “seat” of
arbitration. The intention of the parties as to the “seat” should be determined from other clauses in
the agreement and the conduct of the parties.
21. In the present case, the arbitration agreement entered into between the parties provides Hong
Kong as the place of arbitration. The agreement between the parties choosing “Hong Kong” as the
place of arbitration by itself will not lead to the conclusion that parties have chosen Hong Kong as
the seat of arbitration. The words, “the place of arbitration” shall be “Hong Kong”, have to be read
along with Clause 17.2. Clause 17.2 provides that “….any dispute, controversy, difference arising out
of or relating to the MoU “shall be referred to and finally resolved by arbitration administered in
Hong Kong…..”. On a plain reading of the arbitration agreement, it is clear that the reference to
Hong Kong as “place of arbitration” is not a simple reference as the “venue” for the arbitral
proceedings; but a reference to Hong Kong is for final resolution by arbitration administered in
Hong Kong. The agreement between the parties that the dispute “shall be referred to and finally
resolved by arbitration administered in Hong Kong” clearly suggests that the parties have agreed
that the arbitration be seated at Hong Kong and that laws of Hong Kong shall govern the arbitration
proceedings as well as have power of judicial review over the arbitration award.
22. As pointed out earlier, Clause 17.2 of the MoU stipulates that the dispute arising out of or
relating to MoU including the existence, validity, interpretation, breach or termination thereof or
any dispute arising out of or relating to it shall be referred to and finally resolved by the arbitration
administered in Hong Kong. The words in Clause 17.2 that “arbitration administered in Hong Kong”
is an indicia that the seat of arbitration is at Hong Kong. Once the parties have chosen “Hong Kong”
as the place of arbitration to be administered in Hong Kong, laws of Hong Kong would govern the
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
6

arbitration. The Indian courts have no jurisdiction for appointment of the arbitrator.
23. Observing that when the parties have chosen a place of arbitration in a particular country, that
choice brings with it submission to the laws of that country, in Eitzen Bulk A/S v. Ashapura
Minechem Ltd. and another (2016) 11 SCC 508, it was held as under:-
“34. As a matter of fact the mere choosing of the juridical seat of arbitration attracts
the law applicable to such location. In other words, it would not be necessary to
specify which law would apply to the arbitration proceedings, since the law of the
particular country would apply ipso jure. The following passage from Redfern and
Hunter on International Arbitration contains the following explication of the issue:
“It is also sometimes said that parties have selected the procedural law that will
govern their arbitration, by providing for arbitration in a particular country. This is
too elliptical and, as an English court itself held more recently in Breas of Doune
Wind Farm it does not always hold true. What the parties have done is to choose a
place of arbitration in a particular country. That choice brings with it submission to
the laws of that country, including any mandatory provisions of its law on arbitration.
To say that the parties have “chosen” that particular law to govern the arbitration is
rather like saying that an English woman who takes her car to France has “chosen”
French traffic law, which will oblige her to drive on the right-hand side of the road, to
give priority to vehicles approaching from the right, and generally to obey traffic laws
to which she may not be accustomed. But it would be an odd use of language to say
this notional motorist had opted for “French traffic law”. What she has done is to
choose to go to France. The applicability of French law then follows automatically. It
is not a matter of choice.
Parties may well choose a particular place of arbitration precisely because its lex
arbitri is one which they find attractive.
Nevertheless, once a place of arbitration has been chosen, it brings with it its own
law. If that law contains provisions that are mandatory so far as arbitration are
concerned, those provisions must be obeyed. It is not a matter of choice any more
than the notional motorist is free to choose which local traffic laws to obey and which
to disregard.”” [Underlining added]
24. In the context of domestic arbitration, holding that once the “Seat” is determined, only that
jurisdictional court would have exclusive jurisdiction, in Indus Mobile Distribution (P) Ltd. v.
Datawind Innovations (P) Ltd. and others (2017) 7 SCC 678, it was held as under:-
“19. A conspectus of all the aforesaid provisions shows that the moment the seat is
designated, it is akin to an exclusive jurisdiction clause. On the facts of the present
case, it is clear that the seat of arbitration is Mumbai and Clause 19 further makes it
clear that jurisdiction exclusively vests in the Mumbai courts. Under the Law of
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
7

Arbitration, unlike the Code of Civil Procedure which applies to suits filed in courts, a
reference to “seat” is a concept by which a neutral venue can be chosen by the parties
to an arbitration clause. The neutral venue may not in the classical sense have
jurisdiction — that is, no part of the cause of action may have arisen at the neutral
venue and neither would any of the provisions of Sections 16 to 21 of CPC be
attracted. In arbitration law however, as has been held above, the moment “seat” is
determined, the fact that the seat is at Mumbai would vest Mumbai courts with
exclusive jurisdiction for purposes of regulating arbitral proceedings arising out of
the agreement between the parties.” [Underlining added]
25. Clause 17.1 of the MoU stipulates that the MoU is governed by the laws of India and the courts at
New Delhi shall have jurisdiction. The interpretation to Clause 17.1 shows that the substantive law
governing the substantive contract are the laws of India. The words in Clause 17.1 “without regard to
its conflicts of laws provisions and courts at New Delhi shall have the jurisdiction” has to be read
along with Clause 17.3 of the agreement. As per Clause 17.3, the parties have agreed that the party
may seek provisional, injunctive or equitable remedies from a court having jurisdiction before,
during or after the pendency of any arbitral proceedings. In para (161) in BALCO (2012) 9 SCC 552,
this Court held that “…..on a logical and schematic construction of Arbitration Act, 1996, the Indian
Courts do not have the power to grant interim measures when the seat of arbitration is outside
India….”. If the arbitration agreement is found to have seat of arbitration outside India, then the
Indian Courts cannot exercise supervisory jurisdiction over the award or pass interim orders. It
would have therefore been necessary for the parties to incorporate Clause 17.3 that parties have
agreed that a party may seek interim relief for which Delhi Courts would have jurisdiction. In this
regard, we may usefully refer to the insertion of proviso to Section 2(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996
by Amendment Act, 2015. By the Amendment Act, 2015 (w.e.f. 23.10.2015), a proviso has been
added to Section 2(2) of the Act as per which, certain provisions of Part-I of the Act i.e. Sections 9 –
interim relief, 27 – court’s assistance for evidence, 37(1)(a) – appeal against the orders and Section
37(3) have been made applicable to “International Commercial Arbitrations” even if the place of
arbitration is outside India. Proviso to Section 2(2) of the Act reads as under:-
“2. Definitions.-
……..
(2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in India:
Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions of sections 9, 27
and clause (a) of sub-section (1) and sub- section (3) of section 37 shall also apply to
international commercial arbitration, even if the place of arbitration is outside India,
and an arbitral award made or to be made in such place is enforceable and recognised
under the provisions of Part II of this Act.” It is pertinent to note that Section 11 is not
included in the proviso and accordingly, Section 11 has no application to
“International Commercial Arbitrations” seated outside India.
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
8

26. The words in Clause 17.1 “without regard to its conflicts of laws provisions and courts at New
Delhi shall have the jurisdiction” do not take away or dilute the intention of the parties in Clause
17.2 that the arbitration be administered in Hong Kong. The words in Clause 17.1 do not suggest that
the seat of arbitration is in New Delhi. Since Part-I is not applicable to “International Commercial
Arbitrations”, in order to enable the parties to avail the interim relief, Clause 17.3 appears to have
been added. The words “without regard to its conflicts of laws provisions and courts at New Delhi
shall have the jurisdiction” in Clause 17.1 is to be read in conjunction with Clause 17.3. Since the
arbitration is seated at Hong Kong, the petition filed by the petitioner under Section 11(6) of the Act
is not maintainable and the petition is liable to be dismissed.
27. In the result, Arbitration Petition No.32 of 2018 filed by the petitioner seeking appointment of
an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act is dismissed. It is however open to the petitioner to
approach Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre for appointment of the arbitrator, if they so
desire.
………………………..J. [R. BANUMATHI] ………………………..J. [A.S. BOPANNA] .………………………..J.
[HRISHIKESH ROY] New Delhi;
March 05, 2020.
Mankastu Impex Private Limited vs Airvisual Limited on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196897538/
9
