Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3863, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
517, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 558
Author: M. R. Shah
Bench: M. R. Shah, Indira Banerjee, Uday Umesh Lalit
                                                        1
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. ……….. OF 2020
                                   [Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 8682 of 2014]
         Manoj Suryavanshi                                                   .. Appellan
                                                      Versus
         State of Chhattisgarh                                               .. Responde
                                                JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 08.08.2013
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Chhatisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No.
550 of 2013 and Criminal Reference No. 05 of 2013, by which the Division Bench of the High Court
has dismissed the said appeal preferred by the appellant−original accused and has confirmed the
judgment and order of conviction and death sentence awarded by the learned Trial Court for the
offences punishable under Section 302 of the IPC for having killed the three minor children of the
complainant Shivlal – P.W.18 and also for the offences punishable under Section 364 of the IPC, the
original accused has preferred the present appeal.
3. As per the case of the prosecution, at 7.00 AM on 11.02.2011, two sons of one Shivlal−original
complainant – Vijay aged about 8 years, Ajay aged about 6 years and Kumari Sakshi aged about 4
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
1

years left their home in Darripara to attend the school at Karaihapara and reached the school. On
the school getting over at 11.30 AM, the three minors left the school for home on foot. When they did
not reach home, Shivlal−P.W.18 looked for the children in the vicinity and went to school and
enquired about the children. On enquiry at the school, the teachers of the minor children told
Shivlal that the three minors had come to the school and on the school getting over they had left the
school for home on foot. That, thereafter Shivlal and others looked for the three minors. On not
finding the three minor children, Shivlal−P.W.18 went to the police station, Raipur and lodged the
Missing Person Report. The missing person report was registered in the Daily Journal (Ex. P−18) by
the Head Constable Krishna Kumar Koshle−P.W.17. During the search of three minor children, one
Ashok Patel−P.W.8 stated that he had seen the minor children along with the appellant−accused
near the school. As per the case of the prosecution, on 11.02.2011, Rameshwar−P.W.11 contacted the
accused on cell−phone and talked with him and the accused asked Shivlal−P.W.18 how he was
feeling when his children are missing. According to the prosecution, the accused was working as
labourer in the house of Shivlal. It was alleged that the wife of the accused, namely Sumrit Bai,
eloped with the younger brother of the complainant, namely Shivnath Dhiwar and with the view to
take revenge, the appellant abducted the minors and thereafter killed them. The FIR−Ex.24 was
lodged against the accused initially for the offences under Sections 363 and 364 IPC. According to
the prosecution, after the FIR was lodged, the accused was contacted on his mobile no. 9179484724.
The accused received the call and told that he was 60 kms away. The Investigating Officer−P.W.24
asked the Head Constable Hemant Aditya, Crime Branch to trace the said mobile number and to tell
its location. Then the Head Constable Hemant Aditya traced the location of the said mobile and the
location was found near Village Lakhram. That, thereafter the Investigating team went to the house
of one Ashok Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13, a relative of the accused. Initially, the accused was not in
home. However, thereafter continuing the search, they again went to the house of the said Ashok
Kumar Madhukar. According to the case of the prosecution, thereafter the accused was found and
brought to the police station. He was interrogated in the presence of the witnesses. A memorandum
of statement Ex.P.2 was recorded under Section 20 of the Evidence Act. On the basis of the
memorandum Ex.P.2 and at the instance of the accused, in the barren land in Karaihapara – in the
field of one Damodar Beldar, the dead bodies of the three minors were recovered from the spot of
site. The Investigating Officer collected the incriminating materials during the course of the
investigation. The mobile of the accused was also seized. The Investigating Officer conducted the
Panchnama of the dead bodies of the three minors. The dead bodies were sent for post−mortem.
One Dr. A.M. Srivastava− P.W.23 conducted the post−mortem. The cause of death of the three
minors was strangulation and the deaths were found to be homicidal. During the investigation, the
Investigating Officer received the call details – Ex.P.30 of the mobile phone of the accused. During
the investigation, the Investigating Officer recorded the statement of the witnesses, including the
statement of the original complainant Shivlal and others. That the accused was arrested as per the
memorandum dated 13.02.2011. After conclusion of the investigation, it was found that the accused
had first abducted and thereafter killed the three minors to take the revenge as his wife eloped with
the brother of the complainant Shivlal and thereby committing the offences punishable under
Section 302 and Section 364 IPC. The Investigating Officer filed the charge−sheet against the
accused for the aforesaid offences. The case was committed to the Court of Sessions. The accused
pleaded not guilty and therefore he came to be tried for the aforesaid offences.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
2

4. To prove the charges against the accused, the prosecution examined as many as 24 witnesses as
under:
P.W.    NAME AND DATE
NO.     OF DEPOSITION
P.W.1   Preetam Dhiwar       Witness who seen the minor
        15.06.2011           children with the accused for
                             the last time.
P.W.2   Hafiz Ali            Independent witness
        16.06.2011
P.W.3   Frukh Khan           Independent witness
        16.06.2011
P.W.4   Pooja Tiwari         Witness of minors leaving the
        16.06.2011           school together for home on
                             foot after the school getting
                             over.
P.W.5   Jilani Baig          Witness of minors leaving the
        17.06.2011           school together for home on
                             foot after the school getting
                             over.
P.W.6   Krishna Kumar        Witness of seizure of Registers
        Yadav                concerning the attendance of
        17.06.2011           the minors in school.
P.W.7   Damodar Singh        Witness     of  recording   the
        08.08.2011           statements of the prosecution
                             witnesses under Section 161
                             Cr.P.C.
P.W.8   Ashok Patel          Witness who seen the minor
        08.08.2011           children with the accused for
                             the last time.
P.W.9   Imrat Singh          Maternal uncle of the minor
        11.08.2011           children.
P.W.1   Shweta Tiwari        Witness of minors leaving the
0       12.08.2011           school together for home on
                             foot after the school getting
                             over.
P.W.1   Rameshwar            Independent witness
1       12.08.2011
P.W.1   Ashish Kumar         Witness who conducted the
2       Gupta                photography of the dead bodies
        20.9.2011            of the minors.
P.W.1   Ashok Kumar               Witness of the presence of the
3       Madhukar                  accused in his house situated
        20.09.2011                in Lakhram and of his being
                                  hidden.
P.W.1   Bharat Lal                Witness of the preparation of
4       Dewangan                  map of the spot of incident.
        21.09.2011
P.W.1   Anil Shitlani             Witness of seizure of mobile
5       21.09.2011                phone of the accused.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
3

P.W.1   Bharat Lal                Witness of the dead bodies of
6       Chandravansi              the minors being taken to the
        22.09.2011                doctor for post−mortem
P.W.1   Krishna Kumar             The     Head−Constable      who
7       Koshle                    registered the missing report in
        22.09.2011                the Daily Journal
P.W.1   Shivlal Dhimar            Father of the minor children.
8       16.11.2011
P.W.1   Santosh Kumar             Witness     of   recording    of
9       Yadav                     statements during investigation
        17.11.2011                of missing report.
P.W.2   |Smit Manisha             Mother of the deceased minor
0       Dhimar                    children.
        17.11.2011
P.W.2   Dr. A.K.                  Doctor who conducted the post−
1       Shrivastava               mortem and gave the post−
        18.11.2011                mortem report.
P.W.2   Lav Kush Kashyap          Witness    of   recording  the
2       09.01.2012                statements of the prosecution
                                  witnesses under Section 161
                                  Cr.P.C.
P.W.2   Dr. A.M. Srivastava       Doctor who conducted the post−
3       17.02.2012                mortem and gave the post−
                                  mortem report.
P.W.2   B. Kujur                  The Investigating Officer
4       17.02.2012
4.1 During the trial, the prosecution brought on record as many as 41 documentary evidences. The
relevant evidences are as under:
      SL.     DESCRIPTION                                  EX. NO.
      NO.
      4.      Seizure Memo of the attendance register      Ex.P1
              of the deceased dated 17.02.2011 at 3.30
              pm
      5.      Memorandum         of     accused    dated   Ex.P2
              13.02.2011
      8.      Seizure memo of school bags, plastic         Ex.P5
              bottle and soil from where Ajay’s body has
              been found.
      10.     Inquest / Panchnama of deceased Ajay         Ex.P7
      12.     Inquest / Panchnama of deceased Vijay        Ex.P9
      14.     Inquest / Panchnama of deceased Sakshi       Ex.P11
      18.     Site Map prepared by Patwari                 Ex.P12
      19.     Panchnama of Site Map in presence of         Ex.P13
              witnesses
      20.     Seizure Memo of mobile phone of accused      Ex.P14
      23.     Missing     Person      Complaint    dated   Ex.P16
              12.02.2011 filed by PW18, Shivlal
      24.     Roznamcha                                    Ex.18C
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
4

      31.     FIR No. 64/2011 under Section 363, 364       Ex.P25
IPC registered by PS Ratanpur
      34.     Arrest Memo dated 13.02.2011                 Ex.P28
      35.     Intimation of arrest of relative             Ex.P29
      36.     CDR                                          Ex. P30
      39.     Report received from FSL Raipur              Ex.P33
      41      Village Map                                  Art. A
4.2 After closure of the evidence by the prosecution, further statement of the accused under Section
313 CrPC was recorded. The case of the accused was of a total denial. He did not examine any
witness in support of his defence. That, thereafter, on appreciation of evidence and giving the fullest
opportunity to the accused, the learned Trial Court held the accused guilty for the offences
punishable under Sections 302 and 364 IPC. After considering the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances and after having heard the accused on the quantum of sentence, the learned Trial
Court awarded the death sentence, which was numbered as Reference No. 05 of 2013 before the
High Court. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order of conviction passed by
the learned Trial Court, the original accused also preferred an appeal before the High Court, being
Criminal Appeal No. 550 of 2013. Both, the appeal preferred by the accused as well as the reference
case were heard together by the High Court. By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court
has dismissed the appeal preferred by the accused and has confirmed the conviction and the death
sentence awarded by the learned Trial Court. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court in dismissing the appeal preferred by the accused and
also confirming the death sentence awarded by the learned Trial Court, the original accused has
preferred the present appeal.
5. Shri Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−original accused has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case both, the learned Trial Court and the High
Court have committed grave error in holding the appellant−original accused guilty for the offences
punishable for the offences under Section 302 and Section 364 IPC. 5.1 It is further submitted on
behalf of the appellant−original accused that both the Courts below ought to have appreciated that
there was no eye−witness to the incident and the whole conviction was based on the circumstantial
evidence. It is submitted that, in a case of circumstantial evidence, unless the entire chain of events
is complete, which leads to the only conclusion that it is the accused only who has committed the
offence, a person cannot be convicted. It is submitted that in the present case the prosecution has
failed to form a complete chain of circumstances and the instance which leads exclusively to the
conclusion that the appellant only was guilty of committing the offence.
5.2 It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant−original accused that both the Courts below
have materially erred in holding the appellant−original accused guilty for the offences punishable
under Sections 302 and Section 364 IPC for having killed the three minor children relying upon the
prosecution witnesses, more particularly, P.W.1, P.W.8, P.W.13, P.W.18 and P.W.24 and other eye−
witnesses.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
5

5.3 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−original
accused that the case against the appellant is based on three sets of circumstances: (i) last seen
evidence; (ii) recovery of bodies pursuant to a disclosure memo and
(iii) alleged calls made to the appellant during the search for the missing children. It is further
submitted that the prosecution has sought to use the calls made to the appellant and the testimony
of P.W.13 as an extra−judicial confession made by the appellant. It is submitted that such an extra−
judicial concession is not admissible in law.
5.4 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−original
accused that to establish and prove the last seen evidence, the prosecution has relied upon the
depositions of P.W.1 and P.W.8, whose evidences are full of material contradictions. It is submitted
that as such both the Courts below have materially erred in heavily relying upon the depositions of
P.W.1 and P.W.8, insofar as last seen evidence is concerned. 5.5 It is further submitted by the
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−original accused that so far as P.W.1 is
concerned, he has specifically stated that he was stating the material evidence for the first time in
the court. It is submitted that though another witness – Surya Pratap Dhimar was present with
P.W.1 on 11.02.2011, the prosecution had chosen not to examine the said witness. It is submitted
that P.W.1 is neither credible nor reliable. It is submitted that dropping of a cited witness Surya
Pratap Dhimar has been unexplained by the prosecution. It is submitted that this circumstance will
operate as a presumption against the prosecution in terms of Section 114(g) of the Indian Evidence
Act.
5.6 Now, so far as the reliance placed upon the deposition of P.W.8, who is the second last seen
witness is concerned, it is submitted that P.W.8 states that he communicated that he has seen the
accused with the deceased to P.W.9−Imrat Singh @ Mungi Lal. It is submitted that, however, P.W.9
has categorically denied knowing any person named as Ashok, where he resides. It is submitted that
he has affirmed that he had no conversation with Ashok.
It is further submitted that as per the prosecution P.W.8 communicated his sighting of the missing
children to P.W.18 and his friends − P.W.2 and P.W.3. It is submitted that P.W.2 states that they
met Ashok Patel at about 6/6.30 pm near Dholpara, but in his cross, has denied knowing Ashok
Patel or having any conversation with him. It is submitted that P.W.18 claimed that he met P.W.8
near Darriparra prior to meeting P.W.2 and P.W.3. It is submitted that though P.W.3 maintains that
he met P.W.8 and Dholpara, the testimony of P.W.18 belies the testimony of P.W.3. It is submitted
that the testimony of P.W.2, P.W.3 and P.W.18 that they met P.W.8 is belied by P.W.8 himself who
has unequivocally affirmed that P.W.18 and his friends did not come to him searching for the
children. It is submitted that therefore it is not safe to rely the testimony of P.W.8 also.
5.7 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−original
accused that the prosecution has not proved geographical proximity between the alleged sighting of
the appellant and the place of residence of the children; their school or the location where the bodies
were recovered. It is submitted that there is no evidence on record to suggest that the fields where
the bodies were found were in the same direction as the children were walking when they had been
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
6

allegedly sighted. 5.8 It is further submitted that furthermore the medical evidence concludes that
the time of death of the children was between 12 noon on 11.02.2011 and midnight of the intervening
night of 11/12.02.2011. It is submitted that therefore an alleged sighting in the beginning of this
period is not proximate to the time of death. It is further submitted that even the missing person
complaint dated 11.02.2011 does not refer to last seen evidence. It is submitted that it was entered
on the Roznamcha at 9.40 am on 12.02.2011. It is submitted that the Roznamcha is silent on the
suspicion of kidnapping by the appellant. It is submitted that neither the complaint nor the
Roznamcha contain any last seen evidence or evidence with respect to the alleged calls between the
appellant and P.W.18. It is submitted that the FIR that is lodged on 12.02.2011 at 11.40 pm has a
mention of P.W.8. It is submitted that therefore the last seen evidence of P.W.8 is recorded for the
first time only on the intervening of 12−13.02.2011, which is also the time of the appellant’s arrest. It
is submitted that it is the settled law that the circumstance of last seen together cannot by itself form
the basis of conviction and can only be an incriminating circumstance. In support thereof, the
learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of
Digamber Vaishnav v. State of Chhattisgarh (2019) 4 SCC 522, Anjan Kumar Sarma v. State of
Assam (2017) 14 SCC 359 and Ganpat Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2017) 16 SCC 353. It is
submitted that in light of the principles stated in the aforesaid decisions, the testimony of P.W.8
does not inspire confidence and cannot be relied upon as last seen evidence.
5.9 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that another
circumstances considered by the Courts below against the appellant is the calls and extra− judicial
confession.
5.10 It is submitted that the evidence against the appellant refers to two calls involving the
appellant. The first call is between the appellant and P.W.11 and the second call is between the
appellant and P.W.18. It is submitted that with respect to P.W.11’s call, P.W.11 categorically states
that the call was on 12.02.2011 at night which is when the appellant was in the custody of the police.
It is submitted that he further improved his version when he was re− examined by the Trial Court. It
is submitted that neither P.W.2 nor P.W.18 has testified to this call. It is submitted that neither the
fact nor the contents of this call were put to the appellant during his examination under Section 313
Cr.P.C.
5.11 It is further submitted that the prosecution has relied upon the extracts of the appellant’s CDR−
Ex.P30 (Call Details Report), which does not contain any call made or received on 12.02.2011. It is
submitted that even otherwise the production of CDR is through the Investigating Officer who in
turn receives it from the Head Constable Hemant Aditya. It is submitted that there is no material on
record to show the manner in which the CDR was obtained. It is submitted that even the CDR is not
accompanied by a certificate under Section 65−B of the Evidence Act. It is submitted that therefore
the calls/call details contained in the CDR−Ex.P30 are neither believable nor has been proved by the
prosecution. 5.12 It is further submitted that so far as P.W.18 is concerned, he has alleged a call
made by him to the appellant on 11.2.2011. It is submitted that the said call has not been
corroborated by any other witness. It is submitted that even it does not find mention in the
complaint, Roznamcha or the FIR, which are dated 11.2.2011. It is submitted that there remains a
discrepancy in P.W.18’s version of when he lodged the missing person complaint.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
7

5.13 It is further submitted that the prosecution has not seized the phone, SIM card or any material
with respect to P.W.18’s phone records which would have proved the veracity of P.W.18’s statement.
It is submitted that even there is no material on record to prove the phone number of P.W.18.
5.14 It is further submitted that so far as the confession made by P.W.13−Ashok Kumar Madhukar is
concerned, no other document or witness mentions his presence during the alleged recovery
proceedings. It is submitted that the statement made by the appellant do not amount to a confession
of the offence as a whole, or of any inculpatory fact. It is submitted that since the appellant was in
police custody at that time, any confession made by him would be inadmissible in terms of Section
26 of the Evidence Act, irrespective of whom the alleged confession was made to. It is submitted that
therefore both, the Trial Court and the High Court have materially erred in convicting the appellant
on the basis of such call details and/or the alleged confessions made to the respective witnesses.
6. Now, so far as the conviction based upon the recovery of dead bodies of the deceased minors is
concerned, it is submitted that the said recovery was made from an open area that had been
searched previously. It is submitted that as per the settled preposition of law the recovery made
from an open place, accessible to all and which is not in the exclusive knowledge of the accused
cannot be the basis of conviction. It is submitted that therefore the recovery of the bodies at the
instance of the appellant is full of suspicion. 6.1 It is further submitted that neither PW.7 nor P.W.22
who are the independent witnesses to the disclosure memorandum and all other documents relating
to recovery proceedings on the intervening night of 11.01.2011 and 12.1.2011, lend support to the
recovery. It is submitted that P.W.7 has specifically stated that he signed on blank papers on the
asking of the police and that he did not know about the case. It is submitted that he has further
stated that the documents were not read over to him by the police and that no notice/summons were
given by the police to remain present for seizures.
6.2 It is further submitted that P.W.22 also does not remember the date on which the alleged events
took place. 6.3 It is further submitted that all recovery related proceedings are ante−dated and the
same is proved from the evidence of P.W.22 himself. It is submitted that P.W.22 states that the
interrogation of accused continued till 9.00 pm on 12.02.2011 and that they went to the field at
10.30−11.00 pm. It is submitted that even P.W.18 and P.W.22 testify that all documentation with
respect to the recovery was done the next day at 9.00 pm. It is further submitted that even there is a
discrepancy with respect to the time and place of arrest of the appellant which renders the recovery
doubtful. It is submitted that therefore on the basis of the alleged recovery, the appellant could not
have been convicted.
6.4 It is further submitted that even the recovery cannot be said to be voluntary as the appellant was
detained in custody without any formal arrest.
6.5 It is further submitted that even the medical and forensic examination does not support the
recovery. It is submitted that the post−mortem reports of the victims indicate the presence of
incised wounds on the bodies caused by a hard and sharp/blunt object. It is submitted that,
however, no such weapon was recovered at the instance of the appellant. It is submitted that the
prosecution has not put forth any evidence to show how such wounds were caused by the appellant.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
8

It is submitted that there are so many lacunas at the time of the alleged recovery at the instance of
the appellant, which creates a serious doubt on the credibility of the recovery. It is submitted that
therefore it is not safe to convict the appellant on the basis of such recovery.
7. It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that the Courts
below have committed grave error in convicting the appellant solely based on (i) last seen evidence;
(ii) recovery of bodies pursuant to a disclosure memo and
(iii) alleged calls made to the appellant during the search for the missing children and the so−called
extra−judicial confession made by the appellant, more particularly, when it is a case of
circumstantial evidence. It is submitted that in a case of circumstantial evidence, even if one link is
missing and the chain is not complete which leads to the only conclusion that it is the appellant−
accused alone who has committed the offence, the appellant could not have been convicted.
7.1 Now, so far as the judgment and order passed by the learned Trial Court awarding the death
sentence and confirmed by the High Court is concerned, it is submitted that both the Courts below
have not appreciated and/or considered the mitigating and aggravating factors while awarding the
death sentence. It is submitted that even the learned Trial Court imposed the death penalty/award
of sentence on the same day on which the appellant was convicted. It is submitted that after the
decision relating to his conviction was given, the learned Trial Court held the hearing of the sentence
on the same day when the conviction was recorded i.e. 04.05.2013, thereby violating the right of the
accused to be given ample opportunity to adduce the evidence of mitigation and to be heard on the
question of quantum of sentence as provided under Section 235(2) Cr.P.C. It is submitted that it has
been consistently held by this Court that sufficient time must be given to the accused on the
question of sentence, to show the grounds on which he may show that sentence of life imprisonment
may be awarded and not the death penalty. In support thereof, the learned counsel for the appellant
has relied upon a recent judgment of this Court in the case of Chhannu Lal Verma v. State of
Chhattisgarh (2019) 12 SCC 438. It is submitted that the absence of providing a separate hearing for
sentence vitiates the sentencing process. It is submitted that under these circumstances this Court
has previously commuted the sentence of death to one of imprisonment for life. In support, reliance
has been placed upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Santa Singh v. State of Punjab (1976)
4 SCC 190, Rajesh Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi) (2011) 13 SCC 706 and Ajay Pandit @ Jagdish v.
State of Maharashtra (2012) 8 SCC
43. 7.2 It is further submitted that even otherwise the death sentence awarded by the learned Trial
Court and affirmed by the High Court is not sustainable. It is submitted that the learned Trial Court
has solely looked to the brutality of the crime to impose the death penalty. It is submitted that this
Court has rejected the contention that the death penalty can be imposed on the basis of the crime
alone. It is submitted that consideration of the brutality or the circumstances surrounding the crime
alone renders meaningless the objective of the sentencing exercise envisaged in death penalty cases.
Reliance has been placed upon the case of Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab (1980) 2 SCC 684.
7.3 It is submitted that so far as the High Court is concerned, the High Court has also committed a
grave error in confirming the death sentence. It is submitted that the High Court has not properly
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
9

appreciated the mitigating circumstances, such as the fact that the accused can be rehabilitated in
the society and is capable of being reformed. It is submitted that as held by this Court in the case of
Ajay Pandit (supra), there is a duty on the High Court to elicit the relevant facts while considering
mitigating circumstances and awarding sentence.
7.4 It is submitted that both the Courts below have not appreciated and considered the fact that
there was no criminal antecedents. It is submitted that the High Court has also not considered the
fact that there is a possibility of the appellant being reformed. It is further submitted that at the time
when the alleged offence was committed, the appellant was of a young age of 28 years. It is
submitted that the young age of the appellant at the time of commission of the offence has not been
considered as the relevant mitigating circumstance by the learned Trial Court as well as the High
Court, which ought to have been considered, as held by this Court in the cases of Gurvail Singh v.
State of Punjab (2013) 2 SCC 713 and Amit v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2012) 4 SCC 107. 7.5 It is
further submitted that even otherwise in a case of circumstantial evidence, as held by this Court in
the case of Kalu Ram v. State of Rajasthan [2015) 16 SCC 492, the doctrine of prudence requires that
a sentence of life be imposed, and ordinarily death penalty should not be awarded. It is further
submitted that this Court in several judgments has commuted the death sentence based on the
doctrine of “residual doubt”. Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the cases of Sudam
v. State of Maharashtra (2019) 9 SCC 388 and Baba Vishwakarma v. State of M.P. (2019) 9 SCC 689.
7.6 It is further submitted that even the conduct of the appellant in the prison is very good, which is
also a relevant consideration to commute the death sentence to that of the life imprisonment. 7.7 It
is further submitted that the emotional disturbance of the appellant at the time of the offence is a
relevant consideration not to award the death sentence. It is submitted that at the relevant time the
appellant was emotionally disturbed due to the elopement of his wife with the uncle of the deceased
minors. It is submitted that the appellant’s acts were not the product of a long period of cold
blooded planning, but were instead actions committed during a period of extreme emotional turmoil
and disturbance after he had come back from Chandigarh to Darripara after trying to find out his
wife. It is submitted that the aforesaid aspect has not been considered by the Courts below.
7.8 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that,
unfortunately, subsequently the wife of the appellant has died and the liability to maintain the
children was/is upon his old aged mother. It is submitted that the appellant’s mother is no longer
capable of working and the entire family survives on Rs.300/− of old−age pension that she receives.
It is submitted that the daughter of the appellant was forced to drop the school after class IX due to
poverty. It is submitted that his one daughter is married and the appellant has another daughter
Sanjana aged about 16 years. It is submitted that if the death sentence of the appellant is converted
to life, in that case, the appellant would be in a position to work in the jail and earn something which
would be helpful to his mother and daughter. It is submitted that while the death sentence is
continued, the appellant would not be in a position to do any work in Jail. 7.9 Learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant has further submitted that in many cases this Court has
commuted the death sentence imposed for heinous crimes. Reliance is placed upon the decisions of
this Court in the cases of Shaikh Ayub v. State of Maharashtra (1998) 9 SCC 521, Allaudin Mian v.
State of Bihar (1989) 3 SCC 5, Dharmedrasinh v. State of Gujarat (2002) 4 SCC 679, Nemu Ram
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
10

Bora v. State of Assam & Nagaland (1975) 1 SC 318, Rajesh Kumar (supra) and Brajendra Singh v.
State of M.P. (2012) 4 SCC 289.
7.10 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and acquit the
appellant−accused for the offences for which he was tired. In the alternative, it is prayed to convert
the death sentence into the life imprisonment.
8. The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Pranav Sachdeva, learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the respondent− State.
8.1 It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State
that in the facts and circumstances of the case both, the learned Trial Court and the High Court have
rightly convicted the accused for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC for having killed the
three minor children of the complainant and both the Courts below have rightly awarded the death
sentence.
8.2 It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State
that the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is a well−reasoned and has been
passed after hearing the parties and considering the entire facts and circumstances and therefore
the same is not required to be interfered with by this Court in exercise of powers under Article 136 of
the Constitution of India.
8.3 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
though the present case is based on circumstantial evidence, however, the prosecution has been
successful in completing the chain of events which lead to the only conclusion that it is the accused
alone who had killed the three innocent children.
8.4 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
in the present case the prosecution has been successful in proving the motive for the accused to take
revenge and killing three minor children of the complainant Shivlal−P.W.18.
8.5 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
thereafter the prosecution has been successful in establishing and proving that the accused was last
seen together with the three minor children whose dead bodies were found subsequently at the
instance of the accused. 8.6 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent−State that there are three relevant and material circumstances against the accused,
namely, (i) last seen evidence; (ii) recovery of dead bodies pursuant to a disclosure memorandum at
the instance of the accused and (iii) call details made to the accused. It is submitted that therefore
the aforesaid three sets of circumstances are proved by the prosecution against the accused by
examining P.W.1, P.W.8, P.W.13, P.W.16, P.W.18 and P.W.24.
8.7 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
by examining P.W.2, P.W.5 and P.W.10 the prosecution has been successful in proving that all the
three deceased−three minor children had gone to the school on that day and thereafter after the
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
11

school was over, they left the school together for home. It is submitted that the same is supported by
the relevant documentary evidence.
8.8 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
the minor children were last seen together with the accused, has been established and proved by the
prosecution by examining P.W.1 and P.W.8.
8.9 It is submitted that the dead bodies of minors – Ajay, Vijay and Kumari Sakshi – were recovered
on the basis of the disclosure memorandum Ex.P−2. It is submitted that Ex.P−2 and the recovery of
the dead bodies at the instance of the accused has been established and proved by the prosecution
beyond doubt, more particularly, by examining P.W.7, P.W.22 and P.W.24. 8.10 It is further
submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that during the
course of the investigation there were phone calls with the accused and the conversation has been
established and proved by Ex−P−30 – Phone Call Details. It is submitted that the same have not
been explained by the accused.
8.11 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent−State that
in the present case even the conduct on the part of the accused, more particularly, his absence from
the date of missing of the minor children till he was arrested from the house of witness Ashok
Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13 is a relevant factor. It is submitted that the accused has failed to explain
his absence from the village and from his house. 8.12 It is submitted that in fact the accused was
found in the house of his relative Ashok Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13. It is submitted that therefore it
is established and proved that after committing the offence the accused had taken the shelter in the
house of his relative Ashok Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13. It is submitted that even there was an extra−
judicial confession by the accused before Ashok Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13 which has been
established and proved from the deposition of Ashok Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13. 8.13 It is further
submitted that the death of the three minors was homicidal deaths, which has been established and
proved by examining the doctors who conducted the post−mortem. 8.14 It is submitted that
therefore the prosecution has been successful in completing the chain of events. It is submitted that
therefore both the Courts below have rightly convicted the accused for having killed the three minor
children.
9. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that there are material contradictions in
the depositions of P.W.1, P.W.8, P.W.18 and other witnesses is concerned, it is submitted by the
learned counsel for the respondent−State that the alleged contradictions do not affect the case of the
prosecution. It is submitted that the aforesaid contradictions cannot be said to be the material
contradictions for which the benefit of doubt should be given to the accused. It is submitted that
most of the witnesses are consistent with their statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. recorded by the
Investigating Officer during the investigation. It is submitted that there are no much improvements.
It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent− State that the so−
called/alleged contradictions in any way do not affect the case of the prosecution and the material
evidence with respect to the last seen evidence; recovery of the dead bodies as per the disclosure
memorandum at the instance of the accused and the phone call details with the accused and even
the motive for the accused to commit the offence.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
12

10. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that the incriminating circumstances
against the accused from the deposition of P.W.1 has not been put to the accused while recording his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is concerned, it is submitted by the learned counsel appearing
for the respondent− State that, as such, the said irregularity shall not affect the ultimate case against
the accused. It is submitted that in any case the case of the accused in his statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. is that of total denial. It is submitted that on the aforesaid ground the accused cannot be
acquitted.
11. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that sufficient opportunity was not given
to the accused on the sentence inasmuch as the accused was heard on the sentence on the very same
day he was convicted is concerned, it is submitted that on the aforesaid ground the judgment and
order passed by the learned Trial Court on sentence and confirmed by the High Court is not
required to be interfered with. It is submitted that after the accused was held guilty, fullest
opportunity was given to the accused on sentence. It is submitted that elaborate submissions were
made by the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the accused on sentence and even on the death
sentence also. It is submitted that therefore as such no prejudice has been caused to the accused.
12. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused not to confirm the death sentence and to
convert the death sentence into the life imprisonment is concerned, it is submitted by the learned
counsel appearing for the respondent−State that on striking the balance between the aggravating
circumstances and the mitigating circumstances and considering the fact that the accused killed the
three minor children after abducting them, no sympathy should be shown to such an accused. It is
submitted that, therefore, as such this is a fit case to award the death sentence and the case would
fall into the rarest of rare cases. Therefore, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal and confirm the
death sentence.
13. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the respective parties at length. We have also gone
through and considered in detail the Judgment and order passed by the learned Trial Court as well
as the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court convicting and accused for the
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 364 IPC. We have also gone through and considered in
detail the evidence on record − both oral and documentary. 13.1 The appellant−accused has been
held guilty for having committed the murder/killing of three minor children aged about 8 years, 6
years and 4 years respectively and has been convicted by both the Courts below for the offences
punishable under Sections 302 and 364 IPC. The learned Trial Court, after having held the
appellant−accused guilty for the aforesaid offences, has imposed the death sentence, which has been
confirmed by the High Court by the impugned judgment and order.
14. We are conscious of the fact that it is a case of circumstantial evidence and therefore before
convicting the accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence, the prosecution has to prove beyond
doubt and complete the chain of events which lead to the conclusion that it is the accused alone who
has committed the offence. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, it is required to be
considered whether the prosecution has been successful in establishing the complete chain of events
which lead to the conclusion that it is the appellant−accused alone who has committed the offence?
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
13

15. Having gone through the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court as well as the
judgment and order of conviction passed by the learned Trial Court and the case of the prosecution,
the appellant−accused has been convicted mainly based on three sets of circumstances: (i) last seen
evidence; (ii) recovery of bodies pursuant to a disclosure memo and (iii) alleged calls made to the
appellant during the search for the missing children.
16. Before considering the submissions made on behalf of the accused, few findings recorded by the
learned Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court, are required to be first referred to. The
prosecution has been successful in establishing and proving that the accused was having enmity
with Shivlal−father of the three deceased minor children. The same has been established and proved
by the prosecution by examining Shivlal−P.W.18, Manisha− P.W.20 and Rameshwar−P.W.11. The
prosecution has been successful in proving that on 11.02.2011 all the minors deceased Ajay, Vijay
and Kumari Sakshi went to the school from their house. The prosecution has also been successful in
establishing and proving that on 11.02.2011 at about 11.30 hours the deceased minors left for home
on foot; that the minors did not return to their home. On 11.02.2011 at about 12.00 noon – 1.00 pm,
the deceased were seen going with the accused in school uniform with their school bags. Therefore,
the accused was last seen together with the deceased minors. That, after the incident, the accused
was not found at his house and was missing even from the village. During the search by Shivlal−
P.W.18 and others and after the accused was not found in the village, there were phone calls on the
mobile of the accused. That, thereafter, the accused was found from the house of his relative Ashok
Kumar Madhukar−P.W.13. Immediately after his arrest, the dead bodies were recovered/found
along with the school bags etc. from the place shown by the accused himself. The aforesaid are the
chain of events which led to the conclusion that the accused first kidnapped the three minor
children and thereafter killed all of them. The phone−calls made to the accused has been established
and proved by the prosecution by examining the Investigating Officer and by producing the call
details from the mobile company as Ex.P.30.
17. Now, so far as the evidence of the accused having last seen together with the deceased is
concerned, the prosecution has heavily relied upon the depositions of P.W.1 and P.W.8. So far as the
reliance placed upon the deposition of P.W.1 is concerned, it is the case on behalf of the accused that
while recording his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the incriminating material on the basis of
the deposition of P.W.1 that he saw the accused with the deceased minors at around 1.00 pm on the
afternoon of 11.02.2011, was not put to him and therefore, to that extent, the deposition of P.W.1
cannot be relied upon. However, it is required to be noted that while recording the statement of the
accused under Section 313 Cr.PC., the deposition of P.W.1 was specifically referred to. Therefore, not
asking a specific question arising out of the deposition of P.W.1, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, cannot be said to be fatal to the case of the prosecution. Even otherwise, the accused was
last seen together with the deceased minors has been established and proved by the prosecution by
examining P.W.8−Ashok Patel. P.W.8−Ashok Patel in his deposition has specifically stated that he
saw the accused with all the three minors deceased at around 12.00 hours on 11.02.2011. He has
identified/recognized the accused present in the court. He has also stated that he knew the
complainant Shivlal and he recognized all the three minor children of Shivlal. The said witness has
been thoroughly cross−examined by the defence. However, from the cross−examination, the defence
has failed to make out any case which may doubt either the credibility and/or what the said witness
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
14

has stated in his examination−in−chief. He is an independent witness on the evidence of last seen
together. We see no reason to doubt the same. There may be some contradictions, but according to
us, those contradictions are not material contradictions, which may doubt the credibility of the said
witness and/or may be fatal to the case of the prosecution. Thus, the prosecution has been
successful in establishing and proving that the accused was last seen together with all the three
minor children at about 12.00 noon on 11.02.2011 after they left the school.
17.1 At this stage, it is required to be noted that the prosecution has proved beyond doubt that all the
three minors went to the school in the morning of 11.02.2011 and thereafter they left for the home at
about 11.30 hours. That, thereafter, at about 12.00 hours, the accused was seen with all the three
minor children. At this stage, it is required to be noted that after Ashok Patel disclosed to Shivlal−
P.W.18 and others that he had seen the accused with the three minor children on 11.02.2011 at about
11.30 hours, the name of the accused was specifically mentioned in the missing report given by
Shivlal on 11.02.2011 and the same was also mentioned in the FIR. In the FIR, it was specifically
mentioned that during the investigation of missing person No. 3/11, he had enquired the
complainant and Ashok Patel and Ashok Patel told that he saw the minor children with the accused.
Thus, considering the entire evidence on record, we see no reason to doubt the credibility of P.W.8−
Ashok Patel. He is an independent witness and no mala−fides are alleged against him on behalf of
the accused.
18. Now, the next important evidence against the accused is the recovery of dead bodies which were
found from the places shown by the accused after his arrest. During the course of the investigation,
the dead bodies were found from the places shown by the accused, the places which the accused
alone could have known. Therefore, there is a recovery of the dead bodies along with the school
dress and bags at the instance of the accused. It has been established and proved from the disclosure
memo. The disclosure memo has been exhibited. Therefore, the aforesaid circumstance definitely
goes against the accused.
19. One another circumstance which goes against the accused is that after the incident of missing of
three minor children, the accused was not found in his house and even in the village. He was
contacted on his mobile phone. Initially when he was tried to be contacted, his mobile phone was
found switched−off. However, thereafter, he could be contacted on mobile when Rameshwar−
P.W.11 phoned the accused Manoj on 12.2.2011 at about 11.00 p.m. As per the said witness, at about
11.00 p.m. he phoned the accused Manoj and asked him “Where are you” and the accused told that
he is present in his house. According to the said witness, the accused also told when he was asked
whether any information about the where−about of Shivlal’s children was received, initially the
accused replied that he do not know. But, thereafter, he told that “When my children are crying
Guddu @ Shivlal was enjoying, now when his children are missing how is he feeling”. 19.1 However,
it is required to be noted that the accused was not present in his house at all. From the evidence on
record, it appears that the concerned witnesses – Shivlal and others found that the accused Manoj
was not in his house. Phone calls made at 11.00 pm on the mobile of the accused in the night of
11.02.2011 has been established and proved by the prosecution by producing the call details from the
mobile company (produced as Ex.P.30). The accused has failed to give any explanation on the same
in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Non−examination of the officer of the mobile company
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
15

cannot be said to be fatal to the case of the prosecution, more particularly, when the CDR has been
got exhibited, through the deposition of the Investigating Officer and when the same was exhibited,
no objection was raised on behalf of the defence. Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that the
mobile SIM No. 9179484724 was seized from the accused at the time of his arrest and which is
proved as per the seizure memo. Therefore, the prosecution has proved that the mobile SIM No.
9179484724 belonged to the accused.
20. One other important evidence against the accused is the deposition of P.W.13−Ashok Kumar
Madhukar. The accused was found hiding in the house of said Ashok Kumar Madhukar situated at
village Lakharam which is 5−6 kilometers away. It is true that the said witness has turned hostile.
However, in the cross− examination by the prosecution, P.W. 13 has specifically stated that the
accused Manoj told him that the children of Shivlal had gone missing and Shivlal has lodged a
report against him and the police is looking for him. He has specifically stated in the cross−
examination that he engaged the accused Manoj in conversation and thereafter the police came and
took Manoj after arresting him. Therefore, the fact that the accused was found from the house of
said Ashok Kumar Madhukar from village Lakharam has been established and proved, despite the
said Ashok Kumar Madhukar has turned hostile. As per the settled proposition of law, even the
deposition of the hostile witness to the extent it supports the case of the prosecution can be relied
upon. The accused has failed to explain his conduct in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. about
his missing from the house and even the village after the incident of kidnapping. He has also failed
to explain the reason why he was found from the house of Ashok Kumar Madhukar. It may be that
there is some doubt created by the defence about the place where the accused was arrested.
However, the fact remains that the accused was arrested from village Lakharam on 13.02.2011.
According to the defence, the accsued was arrested on 12.02.2011 evening. But the same is not
established and proved from the evidence. On the contrary, as per the deposition of Ashok Kumar
Madhukar, he was arrested on 13.02.2011. Even as per the arrest memo, the accused was arrested on
13.02.2011. Immediately thereafter, during the course of the investigation and as per the disclosure
memo, the dead bodies of the deceased minor children were recovered at the instance of the
accused. Therefore, as such, the chain of events established and proved by the prosecution as under:
(1) That all the three minor children went to the school in the morning of 11.02.2011;
(2) That all three minor children left the school at about 11.30 a.m. on 11.02.2011;
(3) That the accused was last seen together with the deceased minors at about 12.00 hours – 1.00
p.m. on 11.02.2011;
(4) That there was a prior enmity between the accused and the complainant Shivlal−father of the
deceased minor children as the wife of the accused ran away with the brother of Shivlal and that the
children of the accused were without their mother and therefore he took the revenge how Shivlal
would feel if his children are missing;
(5) That the accused was missing from his house and even the village from the time of the incident
of kidnapping; (6) There were phone calls with the accused on his mobile no. 9179484724 on the
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
16

night of 11.02.2011;
(7) That he was hiding in the house of Ashok Kumar Madhukar and he was arrested from village
Lakharam from the house of Ashok Kumar Madhukar on 13.02.2011 and/or at least from Village
Lakharam;
(8) Recovery of dead bodies of the minor children from the place shown by the accused, which are
recovered from the place/places for which the accused alone could have the knowledge; and (9) That
the death of the minors were homicidal death.
21. As per the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused, there are contradictions in the
depositions of various witnesses, more particularly, P.W.1 and P.W.8 having told that they had seen
the accused with the minor children on 11.02.2011 and even with respect to the telephonic calls and
having talked with the accused after 11.02.2011. However, having considered the so−called
contradictions pointed out by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused and other
evidences, we are of the opinion that those contradictions are not material contradictions which may
ultimately affect the case of the prosecution as a whole. The minor discrepancies and inconsistencies
in the statements of the prosecution witnesses and the minor lacuna in the investigation led by the
police cannot be a reason for discarding the entire prosecution case, if the evidence is otherwise
sufficient and inspiring to bring home the guilt of the accused. As observed by this Court in the case
of Leema Ram v. State of Haryana [AIR 1999 SC 3717], there are bound to be some discrepancies
between the narrations of different witnesses, when they speak on details, and unless the
contradictions are of a material dimension, the same should not be used to jettison the evidence in
its entirety. It is further observed that corroboration of evidence with mathematical niceties cannot
be expected in criminal cases. Minor embellishment, there may be, but variations by reason
therefore should not render the evidence unbelievable. Trivial discrepancies ought not to obliterate
an otherwise acceptable evidence. The Court shall have to bear in mind that different witnesses react
differently under different situations: whereas some become speechless; some start wailing while
some others run away from the scene and yet there are some who may come forward with courage,
conviction and belief that the wrong should be remedied . So it depends upon individuals and
individuals. There cannot be any set pattern or uniform rule of human reaction and to discard a
piece of evidence on the ground of his reaction not falling within a set pattern is unproductive.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that the so−called minor discrepancies/contradictions do not
ultimately affect the case of the prosecution. The benefit of such minor discrepancies/
contradictions should not go to the accused, more particularly, when from the other evidences on
record the guilt of the accused has been established and proved.
22. Thus, for the reasons sated above, we are of the opinion that the High Court has not committed
any error in upholding the conviction of the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 302
and 364 IPC. We are in complete agreement with the view taken by the learned Trial Court as well as
the High Court in so far as convicting the accused for the offences punishable under Section 302 and
364 IPC for having killed three minor children aged about 8 years, 6 years and 4 years respectively.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
17

23. Now, so far as the capital punishment imposed by the learned Trial Court and confirmed by the
High Court is concerned, it is the case on behalf of the appellant−accused that as the learned Trial
Court heard the accused on sentence the very same day on which the conviction was recorded and as
such an error has been committed by the learned Trial Court and therefore it vitiates the award of
sentence, reliance has been placed upon the decisions of this Court in the cases of Santa Singh
(supra), Allaudin Mian (supra), Rajesh Kumar (supra), Ajay Pandit @ Jagdish (supra) and a recent
decision of this Court in Chhannu Lal Verma (supra). While considering the aforesaid submissions,
the object of Section 235(2) Cr.P.C. is required to be considered. The object and purpose of Section
235(2) Cr.P.C. is that the accused must be given an opportunity to make a representation against the
sentence to be imposed on him. Sub−section (2) of Section 235 satisfies a dual purpose; it satisfies
the rule of natural justice by affording to the accused an opportunity of being heard on the question
of sentence and at the same time helps the court to choose the sentence to be awarded. So, what is
required to be considered is whether at the time of awarding of sentence, sufficient and proper
opportunity has been given to the accused or not and when the capital punishment is awarded,
whether the accused has been given the opportunity to point out the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances or not? An identical question came to be considered by this Court in a recent decision
of this Court in the case of Accused ‘X’ v. State of Maharashtra in Review Petition (Criminal) No. 301
of 2008 in Criminal Appeal No. 680 of 2007 dated 12.04.2019. Before this Court the very decisions
on which the reliance has been placed now by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
accused, which are referred to hereinabove, were pressed into service. This Court had the occasion
to consider the very submissions made on behalf of the accused, more particularly, the conviction
and the sentence on the very day on which the conviction was recorded. In paragraphs 29 to 34, this
Court has observed and held as under:
“29. Two recent three Judge Bench decisions of this Court on this aspect merit our
consideration. Firstly, in the decision dated 28.11.2018 in Chhannu Lal Verma v.
State of Chhattisgarh (Criminal Appeal Nos. 14821483 of 2018), this Court observed
that not having a separate hearing at the stage of trial was a procedural impropriety.
Noting that a bifurcated hearing for conviction and sentencing was a necessary condition laid down
in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar, (2009) 6 SCC 498, the Court held that by conducting the
hearing for sentencing on the same day, the Trial Court failed to provide necessary time to the
appellant therein to furnish evidence relevant to sentencing and mitigation. We find that this cannot
be taken to mean that this Court intended to lay down, as a proposition of law, that hearing the
accused for sentencing on the same day as for conviction would vitiate the trial. On the contrary, in
the said case, it was found on facts that the same was a procedural impropriety because the accused
was not given sufficient time to furnish evidence relevant to sentencing and mitigation.
30. Secondly, in the decision dated 12.12.2018 in Rajendra Prahladrao Wasnik v. State of
Maharashtra, (Review Petition (Crl.) Nos. 306−307 of 2013), this Court made a general observation
that in cases where the death penalty may be awarded, the Trial Court should give an opportunity to
the accused after conviction which is adequate for the production of relevant material on the
question of the propriety of the death sentence. This is evidently at best directory in nature and
cannot be taken to mean that a pre−sentence hearing on a separate date is mandatory.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
18

31. It may also be noted that in the older three− Judge Bench decision of this Court in Malkiat Singh
Case (1991) 4 SCC 341, the Court observed that keeping in mind the two−Judge Bench decisions in
Allauddin Mian Case (supra) and Auguswamy v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1989) 3 SCC 33, wherein it
had been laid down that a sentence awarded on the same day as the finding of guilt is not in
accordance with law, the normal course of action in case of violation of such procedure would be
remand for further evidence. However, on a perusal of these two decisions we find that their import
has not been correctly appreciated in Malkiat Singh Case (supra), since the observations in
Allauddin Mian Case (supra), as relied upon in Anguswamy Case (supra), regarding conduct of
hearings on separate dates, were only directory. Be that as it may, it must be noted that the effect of
Malkiat Singh Case (supra) has already been considered by this Court in Vasanta Sampat Dupare v.
State of Maharashtra (2017) 6 SCC 631, wherein it was already noted that the mere non−conduct of
the pre− sentence hearing on a separate date would not per se vitiate the trial if the accused has been
afforded sufficient time to place relevant material on record.
32. It may not be out of context to note that in case the minimum sentence is proposed to be
imposed upon the accused, the question of providing an opportunity under Section 235(2) would
not arise. (See Tarlok Singh v. State of Punjab, (1977) 3 SCC 218; Ramdeo Chauhan v. State of
Assam, (2001) 5 SCC 714).
33. There cannot be any doubt that at the stage of hearing on sentence, generally, the accused argues
based on the mitigating circumstances in his favour for imposition of lesser sentence. On the other
hand, the State/the complainant would argue based on the aggravating circumstances against the
accused to support the contention relating to imposition of higher sentence. The object of Section
235 (2) of the Cr.P.C is to provide an opportunity for accused to adduce mitigating circumstances.
This does not mean, however, that the Trial Court can fulfill the requirements of Section 235(2) of
the Cr.P.C. only by adjourning the matter for one or two days to hear the parties on sentence. If the
accused is ready to submit his arguments on this aspect on the very day of pronouncement of the
judgment of conviction, it is open for the Trial Court to hear the parties on sentence on the same day
after passing the judgment of conviction. In a given case, based on facts and circumstances, the Trial
Court may choose to hear the parties on the next day or after two days as well.
34. In light of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that as long as the spirit and purpose of
Section 235(2) is met, inasmuch as the accused is afforded a real and effective opportunity to plead
his case with respect to sentencing, whether simply by way of oral submissions or by also bringing
pertinent material on record, there is no bar on the pre−sentencing hearing taking place on the same
day as the pre−conviction hearing. Depending on the facts and circumstances, a separate date may
be required for hearing on sentence, but it is equally permissible to argue on the question of
sentence on the same day if the parties wish to do so.” Thus, there is no absolute proposition of law
that in no case there can be conviction and sentence on the same day. There is no absolute
proposition of law laid down by this Court in any of the decisions that if the sentence is awarded on
the very same day on which the conviction was recorded, the sentencing would be vitiated.
23.1 So far as the reliance placed upon by the learned counsel appearing on behalf the appellant
upon the decision of this Court in the case of Santa Singh (supra) is concerned, on considering the
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
19

entire judgment and the facts in that case, we are of the opinion that the said decision shall not be
applicable to the facts of the case on hand and/or the same shall not be of any assistance to the
accused. In that case before this Court, it was found that the learned Trial Court did not give the
accused an opportunity to be heard in regard to the sentence to be imposed on him and by one
single judgment convicted the accused and also sentenced him to death.
23.2 Similarly, the decision of this Court in the case of Allaudin Mian (supra) also shall not be
applicable to the facts of the case on hand. In the case before this Court, it was found that the death
sentence was imposed by the Trial Court without affording proper opportunity of hearing as
contemplated under Section 235(2) Cr.P.C. No reasons were recorded for awarding the death
sentence which as such were mandatory and thereafter on merits this Court found that the death
sentence was no warranted. 23.3 Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions,
more particularly, in the case of Accused ‘X’ (supra) to the facts of the case on hand and on
considering the reasoning given by the learned Trial Court as well as the High Court, we are of the
opinion that there is sufficient compliance of the provisions of Section 235(2) Cr.P.C. The learned
Trial Court heard the accused on the aspect of proposition of sentence separately which is clear from
paragraphs 76 to 82 of the judgment of the learned Trial Court. Hence, based on the material on
record, we are satisfied that the learned Trial Court fully complied with the requirements of Section
235(2) Cr.P.C. The learned Trial Court had considered the mitigating circumstances pointed out on
behalf of the accused and also considered the aggravating circumstances which warranted the death
sentence. Thus, it cannot be said that the accused was not given any sufficient opportunity to put
forward his case on sentence. It also cannot be said that the learned Trial Court has not given any
special reasons while awarding the death sentence. After considering the aggravating circumstances
and the crime i.e. the magnitude and the manner of the commission of the crime in the form of
kidnapping and thereafter murdering three minor children, while awarding the death sentence the
learned Trial Court has considered the following aggravating circumstances against the accused:
“A. This point is not disputed that the accused was annoyed with Shivlal (PW−18)
because 10 days prior to the incident his wife Sumrit Bai eloped or got eloped by the
brother of Shivlal (PW−18) as there was a love affair between Sumrit Bai and uncle of
the minors deceased Ajay, Vijay and Sakshi. In this regard evidence is also available
on record.
B. As well as this point is also considerable that being acquaintance with the accused
and having faith on accused all the three minors innocent Ajay, Vijay and Sakshi left
the school with the accused and were missing. Hence, breaching the faith of all the
three innocent minors the accused has committed the offence of kidnapping.
C. It is also considerable that the accused has committed culpable homicide of all the
three minors Ajay, Vijay and Sakshi whose age was in between 4 to 8 years. There
was 10 days sufficient time gap between the incident of eloping accused’s wife with
Shivnath, the uncle of the minors and the date of committing culpable homicide of
the minors. Hence, the act of the accused is not the act committed under grave and
sudden provocation. On the basis of evidence available on record the act of the
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
20

accused is afterthought with planned manner.
D. It is also considerable that accused has brutally committed homicidal death of all
three minors Ajay, Vijay and Sakshi by processing their neck forcefully who have no
concern with the matter of eloping his wife Sumrit Bai.
E. It is also considerable that accused has brutally, mercilessly and cowardly
committed murder of all three minors Ajay, Vijay and Sakshi who were tender age of
4−8 years and were completely unable to resist and defend themselves at the time of
incident.
F. At the time of committing the said act accused had two children thinking over it
the accused did not have to do the said act. In the light of the said act committed by
the accused the question of maintaining their minor children is secondary.
G. It is also considerable that the said act of the accused is the act which gives
challenge to the social security of the society.” Thus, the submission on behalf of the
accused that as the sentence was recorded on the same day on which the conviction
was recorded and therefore it has vitiated the award of sentence, cannot be accepted.
As observed hereinabove, there is a total compliance of the provisions of Section 235
(2) as well as Section 354 Cr.P.C.
24. Now, so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that while awarding the capital
punishment the learned Trial Court has solely looked to the brutality of the crime is concerned, it is
factually incorrect. On considering the rival discussions as well as the reasons given by the learned
Trial Court while awarding the capital punishment, it appears that the brutality of the crime was
considered to be one of the reasons and not the sole reason.
25. However, at the same time, the prayer on behalf of the accused not to impose the death penalty
and to convert the same into life imprisonment, in the facts and circumstances of the case, requires
consideration. Therefore, now the question which is posed for consideration of this Court is
whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the death sentence is warranted? 25.1 While
answering the aforesaid questions, few decisions of this Court on when the death sentence is
warranted are required to be referred to and considered.
25.2 After analyzing many decisions of this Court on imposition of death sentence, namely, Bachan
Singh (supra); Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab (1983) 3 SCC 470; Mohd. Chaman v. State (NCT of
Delhi) (2001) 2 SCC 28; Aloke Nath Dutta v. State of W.B. (2007) 12 SCC 230; State of Punjab v.
Manjit Singh (2009) 14 SCC 31; Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v. State of Maharashtra
(2009) 6 SCC 498; Sebastian v. State of Kerala (2010) 1 SCC 58; Rajesh Kumar (supra); Ramesh v.
State of Rajasthan (2011) 3 SCC 685; Amit (supra); and Mohinder Singh v. State of Punjab (2013) 3
SCC 294, the decisions which were relied upon on behalf of the accused and after considering few
decisions of this Court involving death sentence which were relied upon on behalf of the State,
ultimately, this Court in the case of Sushil Sharma v. State (NCT) of Delhi (2014) 4 SCC 317 in
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
21

paragraphs 100−104 has observed and held as under:
“100. In light of the above judgments, we would now ascertain what factors which we
need to take into consideration while deciding the question of sentence.
Undoubtedly, we must locate the aggravating and mitigating circumstances in this
case and strike the right balance. We must also consider whether there is anything
uncommon in this case which renders the sentence to life imprisonment inadequate
and calls for death sentence. It is also necessary to see whether the circumstances of
the crime are such that there is no alternative but to impose death sentence even after
according maximum weightage to the mitigating circumstances which speak in
favour of the offender.
101. We notice from the above judgments that mere brutality of the murder or the
number of persons killed or the manner in which the body is disposed of has not
always persuaded this Court to impose death penalty.
Similarly, at times, in the peculiar factual matrix, this Court has not thought it fit to award death
penalty in cases, which rested on circumstantial evidence or solely on approver's evidence. Where
murder, though brutal, is committed driven by extreme emotional disturbance and it does not have
enormous proportion, the option of life imprisonment has been exercised in certain cases. Extreme
poverty and social status has also been taken into account amongst other circumstances for not
awarding death sentence. In few cases, time spent by the accused in death cell has been taken into
consideration along with other circumstances, to commute death sentence into life imprisonment.
Where the accused had no criminal antecedents; where the State had not led any evidence to show
that the accused is beyond reformation and rehabilitation or that he would revert to similar crimes
in future, this Court has leaned in favour of life imprisonment. In such cases, doctrine of
proportionality and the theory of deterrence have taken a back seat. The theory of reformation and
rehabilitation has prevailed over the idea of retribution.
102. On the other hand, rape followed by a cold− blooded murder of a minor girl and further
followed by disrespect to the body of the victim has been often held to be an offence attracting death
penalty. At times, cases exhibiting premeditation and meticulous execution of the plan to murder by
levelling a calculated attack on the victim to annihilate him, have been held to be fit cases for
imposing death penalty. Where innocent minor children, unarmed persons, hapless women and old
and infirm persons have been killed in a brutal manner by persons in dominating position, and
where after ghastly murder displaying depraved mentality, the accused have shown no remorse,
death penalty has been imposed. Where it is established that the accused is a confirmed criminal
and has committed murder in a diabolical manner and where it is felt that reformation and
rehabilitation of such a person is impossible and if let free, he would be a menace to the society, this
Court has not hesitated to confirm death sentence. Many a time, in cases of brutal murder,
exhibiting depravity and sick mind, this Court has acknowledged the need to send a deterrent
message to those who may embark on such crimes in future. In some cases involving brutal
murders, society's cry for justice has been taken note of by this Court, amongst other relevant
factors. But, one thing is certain that while deciding whether death penalty should be awarded or
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
22

not, this Court has in each case realising the irreversible nature of the sentence, pondered over the
issue many times over. This Court has always kept in mind the caution sounded by the Constitution
Bench in Bachan Singh [Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 580]
that Judges should never be bloodthirsty but has wherever necessary in the interest of society
located the rarest of the rare case and exercised the tougher option of death penalty.
103. In the nature of things, there can be no hard− and−fast rules which the court can follow while
considering whether an accused should be awarded death sentence or not. The core of a criminal
case is its facts and, the facts differ from case to case. Therefore, the various factors like the age of
the criminal, his social status, his background, whether he is a confirmed criminal or not, whether
he had any antecedents, whether there is any possibility of his reformation and rehabilitation or
whether it is a case where the reformation is impossible and the accused is likely to revert to such
crimes in future and become a threat to the society are factors which the criminal court will have to
examine independently in each case. Decision whether to impose death penalty or not must be taken
in the light of guiding principles laid down in several authoritative pronouncements of this Court in
the facts and attendant circumstances of each case.
104. We must also bear in mind that though, the judicial proceedings do take a long time in
attaining finality, that would not be a ground for commuting the death sentence to life
imprisonment. Law in this behalf has been well settled in Triveniben [Triveniben v. State of Gujarat,
(1989) 1 SCC 678 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 248] . The time taken by the courts till the final verdict is
pronounced cannot come to the aid of the accused in canvassing commutation of death sentence to
life imprisonment. In Triveniben [Triveniben v. State of Gujarat, (1989) 1 SCC 678 : 1989 SCC (Cri)
248] , the Constitution Bench made it clear that though ordinarily, it is expected that even in this
Court, the matters where the capital punishment is involved, will be given top priority and shall be
heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible but it could not be doubted that so long as the
matter is pending in any court, before final adjudication, even the person who has been condemned
or who has been sentenced to death has a ray of hope. It, therefore, could not be contended that he
suffers that mental torture which a person suffers when he knows that he is to be hanged but waits
for the doomsday. Therefore, the appellant cannot draw any support from the fact that from the day
of the crime till the final verdict, a long time has elapsed. It must be remembered that fair trial is the
right of an accused. Fair trial involves following the correct procedure and giving opportunity to the
accused to probabilise his defence. In a matter such as this, hurried decision may not be in the
interest of the appellant.” 25.3 In the case of Absar Alam v. State of Bihar (2012) 2 SCC 728, it is
observed and held by this Court that the mental condition of the accused, which led to assault,
cannot be lost sight of. It is further observed that the mental condition or state of mind of accused is
one of the factors that can be taken into account in considering the question of sentence.
25.4 Thus, from the catena of decisions of this Court, more particularly, the decisions referred to
hereinabove, for deciding on the issue of sentence, the aggravating circumstances and mitigating
circumstances must be located and the right balance must be adopted. What can be said to be the
mitigating circumstances has been dealt with and considered by this Court in the case of Bachan
Singh (supra). As observed by this Court in the case of Bachan Singh (supra), the following can be
said to be the mitigating circumstances which are required to be considered while deciding on the
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
23

issue of death sentence.
“(1) That the offence was committed under the influence of extreme mental or emotional
disturbance.
(2) The age of the accused. If the accused is young or old, he shall not be sentenced to death.
(3) The probability that the accused would not commit criminal acts of violence as would constitute
a continuing threat to society.
(4) The probability that the accused can be reformed and rehabilitated.
The State shall by evidence prove that the accused does not satisfy Conditions (3) and (4) above.
(5) That in the facts and circumstances of the case the accused believed that he was morally justified
in committing the offence.
(6) That the accused acted under the duress or domination of another person.
(7) That the condition of the accused showed that he was mentally defective and that the said defect
impaired his capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct.” 25.5 In light of the above
judgments, we would now ascertain the factors which we need to take into consideration while
deciding on the question of sentence. We must locate the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
in this case and strike a right balance. In the present case, the following are the mitigating
factors/circumstances:
(i) That the offence was committed under the influence of extreme mental or
emotional disturbance. The accused was emotionally disturbed due to the elopement
of his wife with the uncle of the deceased and that his children were suffering in
absence of their mother with them. The accused was so much disturbed and troubled
is also born out from the deposition of one of the witnesses that on mobile the
accused told how Shivlal is feeling without his children.
(ii) There are no criminal antecedents.
(iii) At the time of commission of the offence the accused was 28 years of age and his
conduct in prison is reported to be good.
(iv) That he belongs to a poor family and is the only son of his parents, and
(v) That he has got an old aged mother who is taking care of two daughters of the accused, out of
which one is married now.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
24

25.6 On the other hand, the only aggravating circumstance pointed out by the State is that the
manner in which the incident took place and three minors were brutally killed. Except the above, no
other aggravating circumstances are pointed out on behalf of the State. Therefore, striking the
balance between aggravating circumstances and mitigating circumstances, we are of the opinion
that in the facts and circumstances of the case, more particularly, the mental condition of the
accused at the time of the commission of the offence and that the accused was under extreme mental
disturbance due to his wife eloped with the uncle of the deceased and his children were deprived of
the company of their mother, the mitigating circumstances are in favour of the accused to convert
the death sentence to life imprisonment. It is true that the court must respond to the cry of the
society and to settle what would be the deterrent punishment for an abominable crime. It is also
equally true that a larger number of criminals go unpunished thereby increasing criminals in the
society and law losing its deterrent effect. .It is also true that the peculiar circumstances of a given
case often results in miscarriage of justice and makes the justice delivery system a suspect; in the
ultimate analysis, the society suffers and a criminal get encouraged. Sometimes it is stated that only
rights of criminals are kept in mind, the victims are forgotten. However, at the same time, while
imposing the rarest of rare punishment, i.e. death penalty, the Court must balance the mitigating
and aggravating circumstances of the crime and it would depend upon particular and peculiar facts
and circumstances of each case. The mitigating circumstances as observed by this Court in the case
of Bachan Singh (supra) and the mitigating circumstances in the present case, if are considered
cumulatively and more particularly, that the accused was under the extreme mental disturbance
because of the reasons stated hereinabove, we are of the opinion that, in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case, the death penalty is not warranted and the same be converted to life
imprisonment.
26. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal succeeds in part. The
Judgment and Order passed by the learned Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court convicting
the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 364 IPC is hereby confirmed.
However, the death sentence imposed by the learned Trial Court, confirmed by the High Court, is
converted into the life imprisonment. It is further observed and directed that the life means till the
end of the life with the further observation and direction that there shall not be any remission till the
accused completes 25 years of imprisonment.
The present appeal is partly allowed to the aforesaid extent.
…………………………..J. (UDAY UMESH LALIT) …………………………..J. (INDIRA BANERJEE)
…………………………..J. (M. R. SHAH) New Delhi;
March 05, 2020.
Manoj Suryavanshi vs State Of Chhatisgarh on 5 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35660020/
25
