Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate
Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Author: R.F. Nariman
Bench: Navin Sinha, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                              1
                                                                               REPORTABL
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2903 OF 2020
                                   (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 26349 OF 2019)
                         MEDIPOL PHARMACEUTICAL INDIA PVT.
                         LTD.                                            ….APPELLANT
                                         VERSUS
                         POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
                         EDUCATION & RESEARCH AND ANR.      ….RESPONDENTS
                                                     JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1) Leave granted.
2) Having heard learned counsel for the parties, it is important to first set out a few basic facts:
i) A notice inviting quotations was issued on 06.07.2015 by the Respondents herein
for Clotrimazole Cream 1% 15 gm tube, the quantity being required for the first year
and second year, being:
                                   DEMAND                         QUANTITY REQUIRED
                                   1st YEAR                       3400 tubes
                                   2nd YEAR                       3400 tubes
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
1

ii) To this N.I.Q., the Appellant submitted its quotation on 09.07.2015, in which it
was specified that the shelf life of the said cream would be only 2 years.
iii) After rates were negotiated and re-negotiated, a supply order was issued on 04.11.2015 in which
it was clearly stated :
“8. Not more than 1/6th of the shelf life should have expired when drug
pharmaceuticals are received in medical store PGI, Chandigarh.”
iv) In accordance with the supply order, the first instalment of 1700 tubes of
Clotrimazole Cream was supplied on 18.01.2016, there being no complaint
whatsoever in respect of the said supply.
However, when the second instalment of 1700 tubes of the self- same Cream was supplied to the
Respondent on 08.04.2016, various complaints were made. The first Respondent drew samples on
29.11.2017, which samples were sent for testing to the Government Analyst under Section 25(1) of
the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940.
v) The first test report dated 27.03.2018 specifically stated that the sample was received on
26.12.2017. This report, which is dated a few days before the shelf life of the Cream expired, found
that the sample was 61.96% w/w as against an acceptable standard of 95- 105%.
vi) As a result thereof, two show cause notices were issued on 13.04.2018 and 30.5.2018 by the State
Drugs Controller and Drug Inspector respectively to the Appellant in which the Appellant was asked
to explain why its licence should not be suspended or cancelled under Rule 85(2) of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 made under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, which relates to licence to
manufacture this product.
vii) The Appellant replied to the show cause notices on 26.04.2018. and 01.06.2018. However, a
third show cause notice was issued on 26.09.2018 by the Respondent in which the question as to
blacklisting arose for the first time.
viii) The reply of the Appellant to this show cause notice dated 04.10.2018 specifically requested the
authorities not to take any action until a final report of the appellate lab, which was pending, was
received.
ix) However, without waiting for this report, on 21.01.2019, the Appellant was blacklisted for a
period of 2 years. A perusal of this report would show that there are no reasons given for the same.
Finally, the appellate lab test report of the Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, dated 19.08.2019
tested a sample that was received on 11.02.2019, that is, long after the expiry date of the Cream, in
April, 2018. Even this sample, when tested, yielded a result of 92.01% which is way above the
61.96% that was found in the first test report.
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
2

x) A post-decisional hearing, based on this report, was given to the Appellant, and it was then found
that the blacklisting order was in order inasmuch as on 18.09.2019 the Drug Committee, which
consisted of a Chairman, two Members, two Special Invitees, one Director and one Convenor, then
expressed their views on the arguments of the Appellant stating, inter alia, that on testing, the
subject drug was found to be only 61.96%, which is markedly below the prescribed standard limit of
95-105%.
xi) As against the decision then taken, the Appellant filed a writ petition in the Punjab & Haryana
High Court, which was dismissed by the impugned order dated 17.09.2019. After extracting the
appellate lab test report, the Court found that being 3% below 95%, which is the prescribed
standard, there was no good ground to interfere with the impugned order of blacklisting.
3) What is clear from the narration of the facts stated above is that the Drug Inspector drew samples
on 29.11.2017 which was long after supplies had been made to the Respondent on 08.04.2016 and
complaints received. From the date of drawal of samples on 29.11.2017 till the date on which the
samples were received by the Government Analyst on 26.12.2017, there is yet another delay of
almost one month. Also, owing to no fault of the Appellant, the sample that could be sent to the
Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, under Section 25(3) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, was
received by the aforesaid Laboratory only on 11.02.2019, long after the expiry date of the goods in
question, which was in April, 2018. Even this sample, when tested, yielded a result of 92.01%, which
is only roughly 3% below the required minimum standard. What is important to note is that the
Government Analyst’s report was shown to be completely wrong. Finally, to cap it all, after a post-
decisional hearing given to the Appellant, the seven-member Committee opined that there was no
reason to recall the blacklisting order based on the result of the first laboratory test report,
completely ignoring the appellate test report.
4) On these facts, we find that the impugned decision reflected in the minutes dated 18.09.2019 is
wholly perverse inasmuch as it is based only upon the first laboratory test report.
5) The High Court, instead of striking down this decision in judicial review proceedings, went into
the appellate laboratory test report itself and stated that as it was 3% below the prescribed
percentage of 95%, the blacklisting order ought not to be interfered with.
6) The High Court ought not to have gone into the appellate laboratory test report by itself. It ought
to have struck down the impugned decision on the ground that it relied upon something irrelevant,
namely, the first laboratory test report and ignored the appellate report. The High Court ought also
to have appreciated that the appellate laboratory report was at complete variance with the first
laboratory test report - the variation being a huge figure of 30%. This was despite the fact that the
appellate laboratory test report tested a sample of the Appellant’s product long after its shelf life had
expired.
7) Section 25 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act states as follows:
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
3

“25. Reports of Government Analysts.— (1) The Government Analyst to whom a
sample of any drug or cosmetic has been submitted for test or analysis under
sub-section (4) of section 23, shall deliver to the Inspector submitting it a signed
report in triplicate in the prescribed form.
(2) The Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the report to the person
from whom the sample was taken and another copy to the person, if any, whose
name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A, and shall
retain the third copy for use in any prosecution in respect of the sample.
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government Analyst under
this Chapter shall be evidence to the facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be
conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was taken or the person whose
name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A has,
within twenty-eight days of the receipt of a copy of the report, notified in writing the
Inspector or the Court before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are
pending that he intends to adduce evidence in controversion of the report.
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs
Laboratory, where a person has under sub-section (3) notified his intention of
adducing evidence in controversion of a Government Analyst‘s report, the Court may,
of its own motion or in its discretion at the request either of the complainant or the
accused, cause the sample of the drug or cosmetic produced before the Magistrate
under subsection (4) of section 23 to be sent for test or analysis to the said
Laboratory, which shall make the test or analysis and report in writing signed by, or
under the authority of, the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory the result
thereof, and such report shall be conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.
(5) The cost of a test or analysis made by the Central Drugs Laboratory under
sub-section (4) shall be paid by the complainant or accused as the Court shall direct.”
8) The decisions of this Court on the aforesaid provision are instructive. In
Medicamen Biotech Ltd. v. Rubina Bose, Drug Inspector (2008) 7 SCC 196, after
extracting the Section, the Court held:
“13….A reading of the aforesaid provisions would reveal that they lay certain
obligations as well as provide safeguards for a person from whom a drug has been
seized for analysis or testing as Section 25(3) specifies that unless such a person
controverts the correctness of the report submitted by the Government Analyst
within 28 days in writing that he intends to adduce evidence to controvert the report
of the analyst, it would be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the quality of the drug
whereas sub-section (4) of Section 25 obliges the Magistrate on the request of the
complainant or the accused or on his own motion to send the fourth sample which
has been disputed for fresh testing to the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory.”
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
4

After referring to the case law on the subject, the Court arrived at the following
conclusion on the facts of the case :
“19. In the affidavit filed to the petition by Dr. D. Rao, Deputy Drugs Controller, and
in arguments before us, it has been repeatedly stressed that the delay in sending of
the sample to the Central Drugs Laboratory had occurred as the appellant had
avoided service of summons on it till 9-5-2005. This is begging the question. We find
that there is no explanation as to why the complaint itself had been filed about a
month before the expiry of the shelf life of the drug and concededly the filing of the
complaint had nothing to do with the appearance of the accused in response to the
notices which were to be issued by the Court after the complaint had been filed.
Likewise, we observe that the requests for retesting of the drug had been made by the
appellant in August/September 2001 as would be clear from the facts already given
above and there is absolutely no reason as to why the complaint could not have been
filed earlier and the fourth sample sent for retesting well within time. We are,
therefore, of the opinion that the facts of the case suggest that the appellants have
been deprived of a valuable right under Sections 25(3) and 25(4) of the Act which
must necessitate the quashing of the proceedings against them.”
9) In Laborate Pharmaceuticals India Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu (2018) 15 SCC 93,
after referring to Section 25 of the Act, this Court held as follows:
“7. The cognizance of the offence(s) alleged in the present case was taken on 4-3-2015
though it appears that the complaint itself was filed on 28-11- 2012. According to the
appellant the cough syrup had lost shelf life in the month of November 2012 itself.
Even otherwise, it is reasonably certain that on the date when cognizance was taken,
the shelf life of the drug in question had expired. The Magistrate, therefore, could not
have sent the sample for reanalysis by the Central Laboratory.
8. All the aforesaid facts would go to show that the valuable right of the appellant to
have the sample analysed in the Central Laboratory has been denied by a series of
defaults committed by the prosecution; firstly, in not sending to the appellant
manufacturer part of the sample as required under Section 23(4)(iii) of the Act; and
secondly, on the part of the Court in taking cognizance of the complaint on 4-3-2015
though the same was filed on 28-11-2012. The delay on both counts is not attributable
to the appellants and, therefore, the consequences thereof cannot work adversely to
the interest of the appellants. As the valuable right of the accused for reanalysis
vested under the Act appears to have been violated and having regard to the possible
shelf life of the drug we are of the view that as on date the prosecution, if allowed to
continue, would be a lame prosecution.”
10) The position is no different under pari materia provisions of other Acts. Thus, in
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ghisa Ram (1967) 2 SCR 116, the testing of
samples was dealt with by Section 13 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
5

1954. This Court held:
“There can be no doubt that the sub-s. (2) of s. 13 of the Act confers a right on the
accused vendor to have the sample given to him examined by the Director of the
Central Food Laboratory and to obtain a certificate from him on the basis of the
analysis of that sample. It is when the accused exercises this right that a certificate
has to be given by the Director of the Central Food Laboratory and that certificate
then supersedes the report given by the Public Analyst. If, in any case, the accused
does not choose to exercise this right, the case against him can be decided on the
basis of the report of the Public Analyst.
xxx xxx xxx In the present case, we find that the decomposition of the sample, which
the respondent desired should be analysed by the Director of the Central Food
Laboratory, took place because of the long delay that had occurred in sending the
sample to the Director.
xxx xxx xxx It appears to us that when a valuable right is conferred by s. 13 (2) of the
Act on the vendor to have the sample given to him analysed by the Director of the
Central Food Laboratory, it is to be expected that the prosecution will proceed in such
a manner that that right will not be denied to him. The right is a valuable one,
because the certificate of the Director supersedes the report of the Public Analyst and
is treated as conclusive evidence of its contents. Obviously, the right has been given
to the vendor in order that, for his satisfaction and proper defence, he should be able
to have the sample kept in his charge analysed by a greater expert whose certificate is
to be accepted by Court as conclusive evidence. In a case where there is denial of this
right on account of the deliberate conduct of the prosecution, we think that the
vendor, in his trial, is so seriously prejudiced that it would not be proper to uphold
his conviction on the basis of the report of the Public Analyst, even though that report
continues to be evidence in the case of the facts contained therein.”1 On the facts of
the case, the Court arrived at the following conclusion:
“In the present case, the sample was taken on the 20th September, 1961. Ordinarily,
it should have been possible for the prosecution to obtain the report of the Public
Analyst and institute the prosecution within 17 days of the taking of the sample. It,
however, appears that delay took place even in obtaining the report of the Public
Analyst, because the Public Analyst actually analysed the sample on 3rd October,
1961 and sent his report on 23rd October, 1961. It may be presumed that some delay
in the analysis by the Public Analyst and in his sending his report to the prosecution
is bound to occur. Such delay could always be envisaged by the 1 Pages 118-120.
prosecution, and consequently, the elementary precaution of adding a preservative to the sample
which was given to the respondent should necessarily have been taken by the Food Inspector. If
such a precaution had been taken, the sample with the respondent would have been available for
analysis by the Director of the Central Food Laboratory for a period of four months which would
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
6

have expired about the 20th of January, 1962. The report of the Public Analyst having been sent on
23rd October, 1961 to the prosecution, the prosecution could have been launched well in time to
enable the respondent to exercise his right under s. 13(2) of the Act without being handicapped by
the deterioration of his sample. The prosecution, on the other hand, committed inordinate delay in
launching the prosecution when they filed the complaint on 23rd May, 1962, and no explanation is
forthcoming why the complaint in Court was filed about seven months after the report of the Public
Analyst had been issued by him This, is, therefore, clearly a case where the respondent was deprived
of the opportunity of exercising his right to have his sample examined by the Director of the Central
Food Laboratory by the conduct of the prosecution. In such a case, we think that the respondent is
entitled to claim that his conviction is vitiated by this circumstance of denial of this valuable right
guaranteed by the Act, as a result of the conduct of the prosecution.”2
11) Likewise, under Section 24 of the Insecticides Act, 1968, this Court in State of Haryana v. Unique
Farmaid (P) Ltd. (1998) 8 SCC 190 held:
“12. It cannot be gainsaid, therefore, that the respondents in these appeals have been
deprived of their valuable right to have the sample tested from the Central
Insecticides Laboratory under sub- section (4) of Section 24 of the Act. Under sub-
section (3) of Section 24 report signed by the 2 Pages 120-121.
Insecticide Analyst shall be evidence of the facts stated therein and shall be conclusive evidence
against the accused only if the accused do not, within 28 days of the receipt of the report, notify in
writing to the Insecticide Inspector or the court before which proceedings are pending that they
intend to adduce evidence to controvert the report. In the present cases the Insecticide Inspector
was notified that the accused intended to adduce evidence to controvert the report. By the time the
matter reached the Court, the shelf life of the sample had already expired and no purpose would
have been served informing the Court of such an intention. The report of the Insecticide Analyst
was, therefore, not conclusive. A valuable right had been conferred on the accused to have the
sample tested from the Central Insecticides Laboratory and in the circumstances of the case the
accused have been deprived of that right, thus, prejudicing them in their defence.”
12) Though the aforesaid judgments pertain to criminal prosecutions under the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, Prevention of Food Adulteration Act and Insecticides Act, yet, they lay down that a
valuable right is granted to a person who is sought to be penalized under these Acts to have a sample
tested by the Government Analyst that is found against such person, to be tested by a superior or
appellate authority, namely, the Central Drugs Laboratory. These judgments lay down that if owing
to delay which is predominantly attributable to the State or any of its entities, owing to which an
article which deteriorates with time is tested as not containing the requisite standard, any
prosecution or penalty inflictable by virtue of such sample being tested, cannot then be sustained.
We have seen that on the facts of this case, the sample drawn and analyzed by the Government
Analyst was delayed for a considerable period resulting in the sample being drawn towards the end
of its shelf life. Even insofar as the samples sent to the Central Drugs Laboratory, there was a
considerable delay which resulted in the sample being sent and tested 8 months beyond the shelf life
of the product in this case. It is thus clear that the valuable right granted by Section 25 of the Drugs
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
7

and Cosmetics Act kicks in on the facts of this case, which would necessarily render any penalty
based upon the said analysis of the sample as void.
13) When it comes to the penalty of blacklisting, the classic formulation of principles in regard to
blacklisting have been laid down in Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal
(1975) 1 SCC 70. This Court put it thus:
“12. Under Article 298 of the Constitution the executive power of the Union and the
State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade and to the acquisition, holding and
disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose. The State can carry
on executive function by making a law or without making a law. The exercise of such
powers and functions in trade by the State is subject to Part III of the Constitution.
Article 14 speaks of equality before the law and equal protection of the laws. Equality
of opportunity should apply to matters of public contracts. The State has the right to
trade. The State has there the duty to observe equality. An ordinary individual can
choose not to deal with any person. The Government cannot choose to exclude
persons by discrimination. The order of blacklisting has the effect of depriving a
person of equality of opportunity in the matter of public contract. A person who is on
the approved list is unable to enter into advantageous relations with the Government
because of the order of blacklisting. A person who has been dealing with the
Government in the matter of sale and purchase of materials has a legitimate interest
or expectation. When the State acts to the prejudice of a person it has to be supported
by legality.
xxx xxx xxx
17. The Government is a Government of laws and not of men. It is true that neither
the petitioner nor the respondent has any right to enter into a contract but they are
entitled to equal treatment with others who offer tender or quotations for the
purchase of the goods. This privilege arises because it is the Government which is
trading with the public and the democratic form of Government demands equality
and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination in such transactions. Hohfeld treats
privileges as a form of liberty as opposed to a duty. The activities of the Government
have a public element and, therefore, there should be fairness and equality. The State
need not enter into any contract with any one but if it does so, it must do so fairly
without discrimination and without unfair procedure.
Reputation is a part of a person's character and personality. Blacklisting tarnishes one's reputation.
xxx xxx xxx
19. Where the State is dealing with individuals in transactions of sales and purchase of goods, the
two important factors are that an individual is entitled to trade with the Government and an
individual is entitled to a fair and equal treatment with others. A duty to act fairly can be interpreted
as meaning a duty to observe certain aspects of rules of natural justice. A body may be under a duty
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
8

to give fair consideration to the facts and to consider the representations but not to disclose to those
persons details of information in its possession. Sometimes duty to act fairly can also be sustained
without providing opportunity for an oral hearing. It will depend upon the nature of the interest to
be affected, the circumstances in which a power is exercised and the nature of sanctions involved
therein.
20. Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person from the privilege and advantage of entering
into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of gains. The fact that a disability is
created by the order of blacklisting indicates that the relevant authority is to have an objective
satisfaction. Fundamentals of fair play require that the person concerned should be given an
opportunity to represent his case before he is put on the blacklist.”
14) This judgment has been followed in several later judgments. Thus, in Patel Engineering Ltd. v.
Union of India (2012) 11 SCC 257, this Court after referring to judgment in Erusian Equipment
(supra), then held:
“15. It follows from the above judgment in Erusian Equipment case [(1975) 1 SCC 70]
that the decision of the State or its instrumentalities not to deal with certain persons
or class of persons on account of the undesirability of entering into the contractual
relationship with such persons is called blacklisting. The State can decline to enter
into a contractual relationship with a person or a class of persons for a legitimate
purpose. The authority of the State to blacklist a person is a necessary concomitant to
the executive power of the State to carry on the trade or the business and making of
contracts for any purpose, etc. There need not be any statutory grant of such power.
The only legal limitation upon the exercise of such an authority is that the State is to
act fairly and rationally without in any way being arbitrary—thereby such a decision
can be taken for some legitimate purpose. What is the legitimate purpose that is
sought to be achieved by the State in a given case can vary depending upon various
factors.” In Kulja Industries Ltd. v. Chief General Manager, Western Telecom Project
BSNL (2014) 14 SCC 731, this Court referred to the leading judgment of Erusian
Equipment (supra) and subsequent decisions of this Court, following the ratio of this
decision, as follows:
“18. The legal position on the subject is settled by a long line of decisions rendered by
this Court starting with Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v. State of W.B. [(1975)
1 SCC 70] where this Court declared that blacklisting has the effect of preventing a
person from entering into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of
gains and that the authority passing any such order was required to give a fair
hearing before passing an order blacklisting a certain entity. This Court observed:
(SCC p. 75, para 20) “20. Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person from the
privilege and advantage of entering into lawful relationship with the Government for
purposes of gains. The fact that a disability is created by the order of blacklisting
indicates that the relevant authority is to have an objective satisfaction.
Fundamentals of fair play require that the person concerned should be given an
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
9

opportunity to represent his case before he is put on the blacklist.” Subsequent
decisions of this Court in Southern Painters v. Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore
Ltd. [1994 Supp (2) SCC 699 : AIR 1994 SC 1277] ; Patel Engg. Ltd. v. Union of India
[(2012) 11 SCC 257 : (2013) 1 SCC (Civ) 445] ; B.S.N. Joshi & Sons Ltd. v. Nair Coal
Services Ltd. [(2006) 11 SCC 548] ;
Joseph Vilangandan v. Executive Engineer (PWD) [(1978) 3 SCC 36] among others have followed
the ratio of that decision and applied the principle of audi alteram partem to the process that may
eventually culminate in the blacklisting of a contractor.
19. Even the second facet of the scrutiny which the blacklisting order must suffer is no longer res
integra. The decisions of this Court in Radhakrishna Agarwal v. State of Bihar [(1977) 3 SCC 457 :
(1977) 3 SCR 249] ; E.P. Royappa v. State of T.N. [(1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 165] ; Maneka
Gandhi v. Union of India [(1978) 1 SCC 248] ; Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi [(1981) 1 SCC
722 : 1981 SCC (L&S) 258] ; Ramana Dayaram Shetty v.
International Airport Authority of India [(1979) 3 SCC 489] and Dwarkadas Marfatia and Sons v.
Port of Bombay [(1989) 3 SCC 293] have ruled against arbitrariness and discrimination in every
matter that is subject to judicial review before a writ court exercising powers under Article 226 or
Article 32 of the Constitution.”
15) We have seen in the present case that the post-decisional hearing proved to be an eyewash as the
seven-member Committee did not even refer to the findings of the appellate report, which showed
that the Government Analyst’s report was wholly incorrect, 61.96% being widely off the mark. Given
the fact that there is considerable unexplained delay on the part of the Drug authorities and the
Respondent resulting in the first and second samples being tested late – the second sample being
tested 8 months after its shelf life had expired – it is clear that the order of blacklisting dated
21.02.2019, as confirmed by the order dated 18.09.2019, is infirm and is therefore, set aside.
Concomitantly, the impugned High Court judgment is also set aside.
16) The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
……………….......................... J.
(ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN) ……………….......................... J.
(NAVIN SINHA) New Delhi;
August 05, 2020.
Medipol Pharmaceutical India Private ... vs Post Graduate Institute Of Medical ... on 5 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89747710/
10
