Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16
September, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5267, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
790
Author: Navin Sinha
Bench: Indira Banerjee, Navin Sinha, R.F. Nariman
                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                             WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO.141 OF 2020
         NEETU KUMAR NAGAICH                                    ...PETITIONER (S)
                                               VERSUS
         THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN
         AND OTHERS                                             ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                             JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
The deceased aged 21 years, a 3rd year student at the National Law University Jodhpur, was the only
son of the petitioner. She seeks justice to unravel the mystery of her son’s homicidal death,
dissatisfied with the investigation carried out by the State Police. The investigation has reached a
dead end without identification of the offenders. The prayer in the writ petition is therefore for a
mandamus to transfer the investigation in FIR No.155 of 2018 dated 29.06.2018 registered under
Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code at the Mandore Police Station, Jodhpur City, Rajasthan to the
Central Bureau of Investigation.
Reason:
2. Shri Sunil Fernandes, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that in the
evening of 13.08.2017 the deceased had gone out of the hostel to a restaurant situated
around 300 meters from the University campus, along with his friends at the
University. His dead body was found at 09.00 A.M. the next morning on the railway
tracks behind the restaurant. Relying on frivolous stories floated of the deceased
having committed suicide due to depression, the University authorities did not
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
1

register a first information report (hereinafter referred to as ‘the FIR’). The FIR was
registered nearly ten months later, on 29.06.2018, after much persuasion by the
petitioner and her husband. The casualness and callousness of the police is reflected
from the fact that neither was the crime scene sealed nor necessary investigation
done with promptitude by proper examination of relevant witnesses including CCTV
footage, and digital footprints, mobile locations etc. and WhatsApp chats during the
relevant period of time on the day of occurrence. It is difficult to accept that the
service providers did not provide mobile dump datas of towers in the location of the
incident or that they were conveniently found by the police to be “dark zones”.
3. The railway authorities had confirmed, Annexure P-2, that during the intervening
night approximately five trains had crossed the track and no engine driver had
reported any untoward incident till the body was suddenly found on the railway track
at 09.00 A.M. next morning. Prior to that a witness who had gone to answer the call
of nature at 06.30 A.M. had stated that he did not see any dead body on the railway
track. The nature and number of injuries found on the body of the deceased make it
evident that it was a homicidal death and not accidental or suicidal in nature. The
caretaker of the warehouse near the place of occurrence has not been examined on
the frivolous pretext that he was deaf and therefore unreliable. The excuse that the
caretaker could not be relied upon, because he was deaf, is preposterous.
4. The deceased was not alone but in company of his friends.
Strangely, yet there is no evidence how and under what circumstances and by whom he was
murderously assaulted. The deceased is stated to have returned back to the hostel. The entry register
bore his initials signifying his return to the campus, yet it has been wished away by a simplistic
explanation of one of his friends that he had made the entry by mistake. Surely this was a matter for
further investigation. If the deceased subsequently left the hostel premises again alone at 10:30 P.M.
there had to be visuals in the CCTV footage at the gate. No investigation of mobile locations
available in the vicinity at the time of occurrence has even been attempted by the police.
5. The husband of the petitioner had moved the High Court in S.B. Criminal Miscellaneous Petition
No.1411 of 2019 dissatisfied with the manner in which the police was dragging its feet in failing to
make proper investigation, raising serious doubts that efforts were being made to protect someone.
The High Court on 24.02.2020 disposed of the petition directing the Investigating Officer to file the
result of the investigation in the court concerned, reserving liberty to the petitioner to challenge the
same. When nothing transpired again and there was no progress in the investigation, the petitioner
preferred the instant writ petition on 20th May, 2020. This Court on 08.07.2020 directed that the
investigation must be completed within a period of two months and the final report be filed in this
Court. The investigating officer thereafter in hot haste has filed a closure report which is thoroughly
unsatisfactory and raises more questions with regard to the nature of investigation done by him,
than it seeks to answer. Shri Fernandes sought to persuade us not to allow the closure report, but to
set it aside and order fresh investigation for resolution of the crime and the offender. Pursuant to
the order of this Court, the petitioner through her lawyer wrote to the Director General of Police
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
2

(Crime) on 10.07.2020 and 11.08.2020 inviting attention to several deficiencies in the investigation
which yet remained to be inquired and has not been taken into consideration at all before
submitting the closure report.
6. Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent State, submitted that
inquest proceedings under Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short, “the
Code”) were commenced promptly. A large number of witnesses have been examined by the Special
Investigation Team constituted pursuant to the order of the High Court. There has been no
deficiency in the investigation. All possibilities have been investigated and the necessary evidence
collected and analysed. Despite the best efforts the offenders could not be traced or found. There
was no occasion for this Court to either direct further or fresh investigation. The closure report may
be allowed to be filed before the court concerned and the law may take its course.
7. We have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties and have very carefully gone through
the closure report also dated 03.09.2020 filed pursuant to our order dated 08.07.2020. The closure
report accepts it as a homicidal death but concludes that there is no clue who the offenders were.
8. The deceased is stated to have left the University premises along with several friends in the
evening of 13.08.2017 at about 07.40 P.M. His dead body was seen the next morning at about 9:00
A.M. on the railway track passing behind Laxmi Guest House. The body was lying on the track
curved at a right angle. The deceased had nine very serious injuries on his person which were found
to be ante mortem in nature. There was no blood at the place of occurrence, but there was blood on
his clothes. Only one slipper of the deceased was found at the place of occurrence. The respondents
had contended before the High Court and also in the counter affidavit filed before us on 03.07.2020
that the death was accidental in nature. The conclusion in the closure report dated 03.09.2020 then
does a volte face to acknowledge a homicidal death with no clue, ruling out an accidental death by
collision with a train. It does not leave much to the imagination that the deceased was not assaulted
at the railway track but elsewhere. Since a closure report has been submitted which we are being
persuaded not to accept, we shall purposefully refrain for a detailed analysis of the inherent
contradictions and the inconclusive nature of the investigation as revealed in the closure report,
except to the extent necessary for purposes of the present order. We find substance in the
submissions made on behalf of the petitioner with regard to the deficient nature and manner of
investigation carried out by the police leading to the closure report.
9. Normally when an investigation has been concluded and police report submitted under Section
173(2) of the Code, it is only further investigation that can be ordered under Section 173(8) of the
Code. But where the constitutional court is satisfied that the investigation has not been conducted in
a proper and objective manner, as observed in Kashmeri Devi vs. Delhi Administration, (1988)
Suppl. SCC 482, fresh investigation with the help of an independent agency can be considered to
secure the ends of justice so that the truth is revealed. The power may also be exercised if the court
comes to the conclusion that the investigation has been done in a manner to help someone escape
the clutches of the law. In such exceptional circumstances the court may, in order to prevent
miscarriage of criminal justice direct de novo investigation as observed in Babubhai vs. State of
Gujarat, (2010) 12 SCC 254. A fair investigation is as much a part of a constitutional right
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
3

guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution as a fair trial, without which the trial will naturally
not be fair. The observations in this context in Babubhai (supra) are considered relevant at
paragraph 45 as follows:
“45. Not only fair trial but fair investigation is also part of constitutional rights
guaranteed under Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore,
investigation must be fair, transparent and judicious as it is the minimum
requirement of rule of law. The investigating agency cannot be permitted to conduct
an investigation in a tainted and biased manner. Where non-interference of the court
would ultimately result in failure of justice, the court must interfere. In such a
situation, it may be in the interest of justice that independent agency chosen by the
High Court makes a fresh investigation.”
10. In Bharati Tamang vs. Union of India , (2013) 15 SCC 578, relief was sought in a writ petition to
quash the charge sheet and the supplementary charge sheet coupled with a mandamus for a de novo
investigation by a Special Investigation Team of competent persons having impeccable credentials
to unravel the conspiracy. This Court relied on the following extract from Zahira Habibulla H.
Sheikh vs. State of Gujarat, (2004) 4 SCC 158, as follows:
“33. ….“Courts have to ensure that accused persons are punished and that the might
or authority of the State are not used to shield themselves or their men. It should be
ensured that they do not wield such powers which under the Constitution has to be
held only in trust for the public and society at large. If deficiency in investigation or
prosecution is visible or can be perceived by lifting the veil trying to hide the realities
or covering the obvious deficiencies, courts have to deal with the same with an iron
hand appropriately within the framework of law. It is as much the duty of the
prosecutor as of the court to ensure that full and material facts are brought on record
so that there might not be miscarriage of justice.” xxxxx “37. In the decision of
Babubhai v. State of Gujarat, in para 40, this Court held that the scheme of
investigation particularly Section 173(8) CrPC provides for further investigation and
not of reinvestigation but held in para 42 as under: (SCC p. 272) “42. Thus, it is
evident that in exceptional circumstances, the court in order to prevent the
miscarriage of criminal justice, if considers necessary, may direct for investigation de
novo wherein the case presents exceptional circumstances .”
38. Therefore, at times of need where this Court finds that an extraordinary or
exceptional circumstance arise and the necessity for reinvestigation would be
imperative in such extraordinary cases even de novo investigation can be ordered.
xxxxx 41.3. If deficiency in investigation or prosecution is visible or can be perceived
by lifting the veil which try to hide the realities or covering the obvious deficiency,
Courts have to deal with the same with an iron hand appropriately within the
framework of law.
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
4

xxxxx 41.5. In order to ensure that the criminal prosecution is carried on without any
deficiency, in appropriate cases this Court can even constitute Special Investigation
Team and also give appropriate directions to the Central and State Governments and
other authorities to give all required assistance to such specially constituted
investigating team in order to book the real culprits and for effective conduct of the
prosecution.
xxxxx 41.7. In appropriate cases even if the charge-
sheet is filed it is open for this Court or even for the High Court to direct investigation of the case to
be handed over to CBI or to any other independent agency in order to do complete justice.
41.8. In exceptional circumstances the Court in order to prevent miscarriage of criminal justice and
if considers necessary may direct for investigation de novo.”
11. The power of the constitutional court may extend to directing reinvestigation was again noticed
in Pooja Pal vs. Union of India, (2016) 3 SCC 135, as follows:
“87. Any criminal offence is one against the society at large casting an onerous
responsibility on the State, as the guardian and purveyor of human rights and
protector of law to discharge its sacrosanct role responsibly and committedly, always
accountable to the law-abiding citizenry for any lapse. The power of the
constitutional courts to direct further investigation or reinvestigation is a dynamic
component of its jurisdiction to exercise judicial review, a basic feature of the
Constitution and though has to be exercised with due care and caution and informed
with self-imposed restraint, the plenitude and content thereof can neither be
enervated nor moderated by any legislation.
xxxxx
90. That the victim cannot be afforded to be treated as an alien or total stranger to
the criminal trial was reiterated by this Court in Rattiram v. State of M.P., (2012) 4
SCC 516, It was postulated that the criminal jurisprudence with the passage of time
has laid emphasis on victimology, which fundamentally is the perception of a trial
from the viewpoint of criminal as well as the victim when judged in the social context.
xxxxx
96. The avowed purpose of a criminal investigation and its efficacious prospects with the advent of
scientific and technical advancements have been candidly synopsised in the prefatory chapter
dealing with the history of criminal investigation in the treatise on Criminal Investigation — Basic
Perspectives by Paul B. Weston and Renneth M. Wells:
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
5

“Criminal investigation is a lawful search for people and things useful in
reconstructing the circumstances of an illegal act or omission and the mental state
accompanying it. It is probing from the known to the unknown, backward in time,
and its goal is to determine truth as far as it can be discovered in any post-factum
inquiry . Successful investigations are based on fidelity, accuracy and sincerity in
lawfully searching for the true facts of an event under investigation and on an equal
faithfulness, exactness, and probity in reporting the results of an investigation .
Modern investigators are persons who stick to the truth and are absolutely clear
about the time and place of an event and the measurable aspects of evidence. They
work throughout their investigation fully recognising that even a minor contradiction
or error may destroy confidence in their investigation.
The joining of science with traditional criminal investigation techniques offers new
horizons of efficiency in criminal investigation. New perspectives in investigation
bypass reliance upon informers and custodial interrogation and concentrate upon a
skilled scanning of the crime scene for physical evidence and a search for as many
witnesses as possible. Mute evidence tells its own story in court, either by its own
demonstrativeness or through the testimony of an expert witness involved in its
scientific testing . Such evidence may serve in lieu of, or as corroboration of,
testimonial evidence of witnesses found and interviewed by police in an extension of
their responsibility to seek out the truth of all the circumstances of crime happening.
An increasing certainty in solving crimes is possible and will contribute to the major
deterrent of crime—the certainty that a criminal will be discovered, arrested and
convicted.”
12. In Dharam Pal vs. State of Haryana, (2016) 4 SCC 160, it was noticed that the
power of the constitutional court to order fresh or de novo investigation could also be
exercised after commencement of the trial and the examination of some witnesses
could not be an impediment, observing as follows:
“25. ….The power to order fresh, de novo or reinvestigation being vested with the
constitutional courts, the commencement of a trial and examination of some
witnesses cannot be an absolute impediment for exercising the said constitutional
power which is meant to ensure a fair and just investigation. …… It is the bounden
duty of a court of law to uphold the truth and truth means absence of deceit, absence
of fraud and in a criminal investigation a real and fair investigation, not an
investigation that reveals itself as a sham one. It is not acceptable. It has to be kept
uppermost in mind that impartial and truthful investigation is imperative. ….”
13. Reverting to the facts of the present case, we find that the occurrence took place in
the intervening night of 13.08.2017 and 14.08.2017. The inquest proceedings under
Section 174 Cr.P.C. were registered on 14.08.2017 but remained inconclusive, and
now in view of the closure report deserves to be consigned. The death of the deceased
was initially sought to be passed off as accidental by collision with a train or suicidal
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
6

due to depression. The F.I.R. under Section 302, IPC was registered very much
belatedly on 29.06.2018, albeit reluctantly, only at the persistence of the petitioner
and her husband after they repeatedly approached the higher authorities. Even
thereafter the investigation remained at a standstill till the filing of the counter
affidavit before this Court as recent as 03.07.2020 with the respondents insisting that
the death was accidental and that the nature of injuries could not attribute a
homicidal death. Earlier the husband of the petitioner had also petitioned the High
Court where till 20.07.2019 the respondents insisted that the death was accidental in
nature. Unfortunately, the High Court despite noticing the long pendency of the
investigation took a misguided approach that the petitioner had not expressed
suspicion against any one and neither had he alleged biased against the Investigating
Officer, to pass an open ended order to investigate the case and file a report. In this
manner, the investigation remained inconclusive for nearly three long years with the
investigating agency sanguine of passing it off as an accidental death without coming
to a firm conclusion avoiding to complete the investigation. It is only when we
ordered on 08.07.2020 that the investigation be concluded within a period of two
months and the final report be placed before us, that suddenly a very lengthy
investigation closure report has been filed before us taking a stand that though the
death was homicidal there was no clue. The closure report is therefore, to our mind, a
clear hasty action leaving much to be desired regarding the nature of investigation,
because if a detailed investigation had already been done as is sought to be now
suggested, there is no reason why a final report could not have been filed by the
investigating agency in the normal course of events and needed an order to do so
from this Court. The entire investigation and the closure report therefore lack
bonafide. The interest of justice therefore requires a de novo investigation to be done,
to sustain the confidence of the society in the rule of law irrespective of who the
actors may be.
14. We, therefore, set aside the closure report and direct a de novo investigation by a
fresh team of investigators to be headed by a senior police officer of the State
consisting of efficient personnel well conversant with use of modern investigation
technology also. No officer who was part of the investigating team leading to the
closure report shall be part of the team conducting de novo investigation. Much time
has passed and there is undoubtedly an urgency in the matter now.
We therefore direct that such fresh investigation must be concluded within a maximum period of
two months from today and the police report be filed before the court concerned whereafter the
matter shall proceed in accordance with law.
15. The writ petition is allowed.
…………...................J. [R.F. NARIMAN] …………...................J. [NAVIN SINHA] …………...................J.
[INDIRA BANERJEE] NEW DELHI SEPTEMBER 16, 2020.
Neetu Kumar Nagaich vs The State Of Rajasthan on 16 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19386490/
7
