Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7
February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3407, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
174, (2020) 1 SCT 823 (2020) 3 SCALE 303, (2020) 3 SCALE 303
Author: A.S. Bopanna
Bench: A.S. Bopanna, R. Banumathi
                                                                 REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1215        OF 2020
                                (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.28123 of 2018)
                         Nitesh Kumar Pandey                       .…Appellant(s)
                                                   Versus
                         The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.     …. Respondent(s)
                         WITH
                         C.A.No. 1216    /2020 @ SLP(C) No.27200/2018
                         C.A.Nos.1217−1218/2020 @ SLP(C) Nos.3225−3226/2020
                         (D.No.41845/2018)
                                            JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
Leave granted.
2. The appellant in the appeal arising out of SLP No.27200 of 2018 was the appellant in WA No.
509/2018 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. In the said by Learned Single Judge dated
02.04.2018 in W.P.No. 17:05:52 IST Reason:
1494/2017 and W.P.No. 21425/2016. The appellant in the appeal arising out of SLP
No. 28123 of 2018 was the appellant in WA No. 533/2018 in the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh. The said appeal was filed assailing the order of Learned Single
Judge dated 29.07.2016 in W.P.No.12689 of 2016. The appellant in the appeal arising
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
1

out of SLP(C) D.No. 41845, was the appellant in W.A No. 207/2017 before the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh. The said appeal was disposed of by order dated
28.08.2018 in terms of the order dated 06.08.2008 in R.P.No. 682/2018. Though
two separate orders dated 06.08.2018 passed in WA Nos. 509 and 533/2018 and
order dated 28.08.2018 in W.A.No.207/2017 are assailed in these appeals, since the
issue is common and all the writ appeals have been disposed of by the High Court
relying upon its earlier orders, these appeals were taken up together, heard and are
being disposed of by this common judgment.
3. The issue relates to the selection to the post of Gram Rojgar Sahayak in the Panchayat of the Rewa
District in Madhya Pradesh. Though the issue presently pertains to the method adopted in the
selection process in Rewa District, the scheme applicable to the entire state of Madhya Pradesh for
such recruitment of Gram Rojgar Sahayak for implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (‘MGNREGS’ for short) is to be taken note and the matter is
to be decided in that background. As noted, the issue presently being limited to the selection process
in Rewa District assailing the method that was followed therein, it is seen that a batch of writ
petitions relating to the same process were earlier considered by a Learned Single Judge through the
order dated 15.07.2016 and had allowed the writ petitions bearing W.P.No.17183/2014 and the
analogous matters. Challenge to the said order had concluded through the order passed by the
Division Bench in W.A.No.479/2016 and the second Review Petition in R.P.No.682/2018. In that
circumstance, since in the present case the contentions put forth by the appellants herein before the
Division Bench of the High Court was similar to the said cases, the Division Bench of the High Court
had dismissed the said writ appeals bearing W.A.Nos.509/2018, 533/2018 and W.A.No.207/2017.
The appellants claiming to be aggrieved are, therefore, before this court in these appeals.
4. At the outset, it is to be noted that though the orders dated 06.08.2018 and 28.08.2018 passed in
the Writ Appeals relating to the appellants herein are assailed, the relied upon order which contains
the reasoning adopted by the High Court is not assailed in these appeals. That apart the SLP against
the earlier order is already dismissed. Be that as it may, since the issue urged herein is to assail the
relief granted to the writ petitioners by the High Court, the consideration of the correctness or
otherwise is to be made in that regard.
5. Heard Mr. Anoop G. Chaudhari, Ms. June Chaudhari and Mr. Satyam Reddy, respective learned
Senior Advocates for the appellants, Mr. Santosh Paul, learned Senior Advocate for the private
respondent and Mr. Rahul Kaushik, learned Advocate for the State of Madhya Pradesh. In that light
we have also perused the appeal papers.
6. The brief facts are that the official respondents invited applications for appointment to the post of
Gram Rojgar Sahayak. The said appointment was to be made in terms of the fresh guidelines dated
02.06.2012 issued by the Madhya Pradesh State Employment Guarantee Parishad which is a
registered institution constituted under the Panchayat and Rural Development Department. As per
the same, one Gram Rojgar Sahayak per panchayat was to be appointed under the MGNREG
scheme. The said guidelines provided for the qualifications which were classified as (a) Compulsory
qualifications and (b) Desired qualifications. The compulsory qualifications specified was with
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
2

regard to the basic education qualifications and under the Desired qualifications it referred to
computer exam pass from any one institution mentioned in the memo of General Administration
Department. Clause (8) of the said guidelines also provided with regard to the Selection process
whereunder sub−Clause (8) therein further provided for the assignment of maximum marks under
each of the criteria stated therein. In so far as the computer examination, the pass certificate from
the different Universities are named therein and the maximum marks of ‘50’ is provided thereunder.
7. Though the selection process was to be conducted based on the criteria and the method of
assessment provided under the guidelines dated 02.06.2012, the office of Collector, Rewa, Madhya
Pradesh issued a Revised Time Schedule for recruitment of Gram Rojgar Sahayak, dated 17.06.2014
and the date for initiation of recruitment was indicated as … ‘before 20 th June, 2014’. Similarly, the
schedule for the different stages in the selection process was indicated. At serial No.9 of the Revised
Time Schedule, the outer date was indicated for holding of computer efficiency test of selected
candidates and those at the top of the merit list, which was to be held before 18th September.
Pursuant to the same, the process was conducted but the writ petitioners were removed from the
select list based on the result of the computer efficiency test. Since the computer efficiency test was
not contemplated as a criteria for selection under the fresh guidelines dated 02.06.2012, the writ
petitioners assailed the same before the Learned Single Judge, in the said batch of writ petitions.
8. The Learned Single Judge after taking note of the above facts arrived at the conclusion that the
reading of the scheme shows that the selection procedure and methodology of giving marks do not
include the computer efficiency test and the marks arising out of such test. The writ petitioners were
meritorious and their names were in the merit list, but for the marks of the computer efficiency test
being included. In view of that position, the writ petitioners were taken out of the select list which
was held, not justified. In that regard, the Learned Single Judge had taken note that the method was
altered after the selection process had commenced which is not permissible. It was held that the
introduction of the computer efficiency test mid−way was contrary to the settled legal position and
as such disapproved the action of the respondents in prescribing the computer efficiency test,
dehors the common guidelines. Accordingly, the writ petitions were allowed. The candidates who
had benefitted in the selection process due to the holding of computer efficiency test preferred the
writ appeals claiming to be aggrieved. The Division Bench of the High Court having taken note of
the factual aspects had agreed with the reasons assigned by the Learned Single Judge and dismissed
the writ appeals. The review petitions in R.P.No.611/16, 612/16 and connected matters were also
rejected through order dated 17.10.2016, save certain observations made relating to the protection of
meritorious candidates who had also appeared for the computer efficiency test. The Special Leave
Petitions filed before this Court by some of the appellants had also been dismissed.
9. The learned senior Advocate for the appellants while assailing the order passed by the High Court
would contend that the implementation of the MGNREG Scheme required skill in computer
application as the entire process was computerised and the various functions relating to the same
could only be implemented by a person having efficiency in handling the computers. In that view it
was contended, when the Gram Rojgar Sahayak was to undertake such work, the computer
efficiency was an aspect to be tested, which was a part of the selection process and, therefore, in that
circumstance when the office of the Collector had chosen to include the computer efficiency test as a
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
3

criteria, the High Court ought not to have accepted the contention put forth by the writ petitioners.
It is contented that the Revised Time Schedule was issued on 17.06.2014 and the process was
commenced on 20.06.2014, therefore, the change had not been introduced after the commencement
of the process. It is, in that view, contended that the writ petitioners being aware of the schedule,
had appeared in the computer efficiency test and having failed to qualify cannot thereafter turn
around to challenge the same. It is contended that the law is well settled in that regard, which has
been ignored by the High Court. Therefore, the order passed is to be treated as per incuriam.
10. The learned senior Advocate for the private respondent would seek to justify the order passed by
the High Court. It is contended that the Collector, Rewa District had exceeded his powers and had
introduced a criteria which was not contemplated in the fresh guidelines dated 02.06.2012. It is
pointed out that the guidelines dated 02.06.2012 provided that the Desired qualification relating to
computer course should be from the institutions specified and had also provided for assigning
marks under that criteria which alone is the prescribed norm for selection under the guidelines and
did not provide for efficiency test. The selection process had commenced pursuant to the said
guidelines and the Revised time Schedule, whereunder the computer efficiency test was introduced
is in alteration of the process which had already commenced. Hence the High Court was justified in
its conclusion is the contention. It is further contended that the writ petitioners were not estopped
from challenging the action inasmuch as the Revised Time Schedule had only indicated that the
computer efficiency test was for the selected candidates and those at the top of the merit list. It was
submitted that the revised time schedule did not specify the qualification in computer efficiency test
to be a pre− condition to secure inclusion in the select list. The writ petitioners were already in the
select list. The exclusion from the merit list is also not indicated therein and, therefore, the writ
petitioners in that light had not acceded to any criteria while appearing for the computer efficiency
test as the same was shown only as a process subsequent to the selection list. In any event the High
Court has taken note of the said aspect, addressed the contentions and thereafter arrived at its
conclusion and, therefore, the order cannot be termed as per incuriam as contended.
11. In the light of the contention, a perusal of the order passed by the learned single judge as also the
order passed in the writ appeal and the review petition in the relied upon cases relating to Amit
Kumar Mishra and Others would indicate that a detailed discussion has been made by the High
Court and we see no reason to differ from the same. In this regard we have noticed the fresh
guidelines dated 02.06.2012. Though the said guidelines refer to the requirement of computer
knowledge as a Desired qualification, the same also provides for such qualification in computer
exam from the institutions depicted therein and the selection process provides for the assignment of
marks which has been extracted and taken note by the Learned Single Judge. The said guidelines are
applicable to all the Districts in the entire state of Madhya Pradesh as confirmed by the learned
Advocate for the State of Madhya Pradesh. The Revised Time Schedule dated 17.06.2014 issued by
the Collector, Rewa, Madhya Pradesh is only in respect of one District namely District Rewa.
12. Therefore, at the outset when the scheme applicable to the entire State is made under a common
guideline, the alteration of the requirement by prescribing an additional criteria only in respect of
one District without such authority do so will not be sustainable. Furthermore, the application for
the post of Gram Rojgar Sahayak was to be made in terms of the revised guidelines dated
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
4

02.06.2012. By the Revised Time Schedule dated 17.06.2014 what is provided for essentially is the
time frame for carrying out each of the requirement relating to the initiation of the recruitment till
the selected candidate joins the post. It is under the said time schedule, a date has been fixed for
holding the computer efficiency test. Therefore, it would indicate that the additional criteria has
been introduced after the selection process has commenced and when such requirement was not
indicated in the fresh guidelines dated 02.06.2012 issued in respect of the entire State. Therefore,
the conclusion reached by the High Court that the requirement has been altered after the
commencement of the selection process is justified and unassailable.
13. The learned senior Advocate for the appellants while contending that the writ petitioners having
participated in the computer efficiency test are estopped from raising any grievance subsequently
has placed strong reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Ashok Kumar and
Another vs. State of Bihar and Others (2017) 4 SCC 357 wherein it is held as hereunder:−
13. The law on the subject has been crystallised in several decisions of this Court. In Chandra
Prakash Tiwari v. Shakuntala Shukla, this Court laid down the principle that when a candidate
appears at an examination without objection and is subsequently found to be not successful, a
challenge to the process is precluded. The question of entertaining a petition challenging an
examination would not arise where a candidate has appeared and participated. He or she cannot
subsequently turn around and contend that the process was unfair or that there was a lacuna
therein, merely because the result is not palatable. In Union of India v. S. Vinodh Kumar, this court
held that:
“18. It is also well settled that those candidates who had taken part in the selection
process knowing fully well the procedure laid down therein were not entitled to
question the same. (See Munindra Kumar v. Rajiv Govil and Rashmi Mishra v. M.P.
Public Service Commision.)” In that light it is further contended that the Supreme
Court in the case of Subhash Chandra and Another vs. Delhi Subordinate Services
Selection Board and Others (2009) 15 SCC 458 has held that a decision rendered in
ignorance of a binding precedent will have to be held as a decision rendered per
incuriam.
14. Having taken note of the decisions cited, we have no doubt in our mind that the well accepted
position in law is that the person who has acceded to a position and participated in the process
cannot be permitted to approbate and reprobate. It is a norm that if a person/candidate having
taken note of a requirement in the notification and even if it is objectionable does not challenge the
same but despite having knowledge of the same participates in the said process and takes a chance,
on failing in the process such person/candidate cannot turn around and assail the same. Though
that is the position in law, the said position of law will not be applicable to the present case as the
facts in the case on hand is not the same. In the cited case of Ashok Kumar, it was a situation where
the subsequent notification for written examination was issued after nullifying the result of the
earlier written examination. The petitioner therein who had appeared for the examination earlier,
having knowingly participated in the process by once again appearing for the examination which
was notified had thereafter challenged, which was a clear case of approbate and reprobate. On the
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
5

other hand in the instant case, firstly, the Revised Time Schedule issued by the Collector, Rewa
cannot be termed as the recruitment notification indicating all the criteria for selection; but can only
be termed as a time schedule prescribed pursuant to the recruitment process as provided under the
fresh guidelines dated 02.06.2012. Therefore, a candidate already in selection list who has appeared
in the computer efficiency test on the date depicted in the revised time schedule cannot be
considered to have appeared after having knowledge that the same will also be a part of the
assessment for selection and cannot be put on the same pedestal. This is more so in a circumstance
wherein the schedule for “18th December” as prescribed reads….. “holding of computer efficiency
test of selected candidates and those at the top of merit list”. A perusal of the same would indicate
that the entire selection would be based on the criteria prescribed and the marks as assigned under
the fresh guidelines dated 02.06.2012 and appearance for the computer efficiency test would be
treated as a requirement which would enable the authorities to assess a person who has otherwise
qualified and has been found fit to be in the selected list or is at the top of the merit list.
15. Therefore, in that circumstance the mere indication of the date for computer efficiency test in the
time schedule and the participation therein cannot be considered as if the candidate has acceded to
the same so as to estop such candidate from challenging the action of the respondent if the name of
such candidate is removed from the select list thereafter treating the same as the basis. Hence in the
instant case it cannot be considered as a typical case of approbate and reprobate. In that view since
the high court has addressed this issue taking note of the decision which was cited before it and has
thereafter arrived at its conclusion, the decision relied on by the learned senior counsel for the
appellants, in the case of Ashok Kumar and Another vs. State of Bihar and Others will not be of any
assistance. Hence it cannot be held that the decision of the High Court is per incuriam as contended.
16. Further what cannot escape the attention is also that certain other persons who were similarly
placed as that of the petitioners have already approached this court in SLP Nos.3239−3242/2017
wherein the relied upon decision in the review petition was assailed but this court has dismissed the
special leave petitions. Therefore, taking into consideration all the aspects of the matter we see no
reason to interfere with the orders impugned herein.
17. During the course of the argument, the learned senior Advocate for the appellants also referred
to certain observations contained in the order dated 17.10.2016 passed by the Division Bench in the
review petition where certain protection is provided to the meritorious candidates who have been
selected under the policy dated 02.06.2012. In that regard we do not find it appropriate to advert
and make any comment since we have already arrived at conclusion that the orders impugned do
not call for interference.
18. The appeals are accordingly dismissed without any order as to costs. Pending applications if any,
shall also stand disposed of.
………….…………….J. (R. BANUMATHI) .……………………….J. (A.S. BOPANNA) New Delhi, February
07, 2020
Nitesh Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19557052/
6
