Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 447, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
26, (2020) 1 ALLCRILR 377, (2020) 1 CRIMES 219, (2020) 1 RECCRIR 699,
(2020) 1 UC 1, (2020) 2 SCALE 48, AIR 2020 SC( CRI) 476
Author: R. Banumathi
Bench: R. Banumathi, A.S. Bopanna, Hrishikesh Roy
                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 87            OF 2020
                                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.6990 of 2018)
                         PADUM KUMAR                                           ...Appell
                                                      VERSUS
                         STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                              …Respondent
                                                  JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
Leave granted.
2. This appeal has been preferred challenging the impugned judgment dated 19.02.2018 passed by
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Criminal Revision No.511 of 2006 whereby the High
Court dismissed the revision petition filed by the appellant confirming his conviction under Sections
467 and 468 IPC and the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him.
3. Briefly stated case of the prosecution is as under:-
The appellant-Padum Kumar was then working as Postman in Indira Nagar Post
Office, Lucknow. On 09.04.1992, PW-3-Dr. M.L. Varshney, Professor, Agriculture
Institute, Naini, Allahabad had sent a registered envelope No.0095 to the
Complainant-Dr. K.B. Varshney (PW-1) from the Sub-Post Office of the said Institute.
The said envelope contained four Indira Vikas Patra of value of each Rs.5,000/-
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
1

totalling Rs.20,000/-. The envelope did not reach PW-1- Dr. K.B. Varshney;
therefore, on 27.04.1992, PW-3-Dr. M.L. Varshney made a complaint before the Post
Master, Post Office, Agriculture Institute, Naini, Allahabad. PW-1-Complainant-Dr.
K.B. Varshney also enquired from Indira Nagar Post Office. On 29.04.1992, PW-1 had
also filed a complaint to the Senior Superintendent, Department of Posts that the
envelope Registry No.0095 has not been received. On 14.05.1992, information was
received from Senior Superintendent, Post and Telegraph, Lucknow that a person
named “Mohan” has received the aforesaid registry on 13.04.1992. Then, PW-1 and
his son Devesh Mohan-PW-2 went to Indira Nagar Post Office and saw the signature
where it has been written as “D. Mohan”. Complainant’s son is also named Devesh
Mohan (PW-2). On being shown the signature, PW-2 denied that the signature in
question belongs to him. A case was registered in Crime No.394/1992 under Sections
420, 467 and 468 IPC at P.S. Ghazipur, Lucknow. The case was investigated. Later
on, the investigation of the case was entrusted to C.B. C.I.D.
4. The Investigating Officer has recorded the statement of various witnesses. The Investigating
Officer had sent the disputed signature along with the specimen signatures of PW-2-Devesh Mohan
to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow. As per the report given by the Forensic Science
Laboratory, Lucknow, the person who has made specimen signatures has also made the disputed
signature in the delivery slip-Ex.-P4. The disputed signature “Q-1” along with the specimen
signatures of PW-2 “S-1 to S-6” were sent to private hand-writing expert M.Y. Khan-PW-5. In his
evidence, PW-5 has stated that on comparison of the disputed signature “Q-1” in Ex.-P4-delivery
slip with the specimen signatures of PW-2 “S-1 to S-6”, he came to the conclusion that the disputed
signature is different from the specimen signatures and PW-5 had issued his report-Ex.-P9. Yet
another hand-writing expert Siya Ram Gupta had also examined the disputed signature with
reference to the specimen signatures. Siya Ram Gupta had opined that the disputed signature in the
delivery slip has not been made by PW-2- Devesh Mohan. By the time of trial, hand-writing expert
Siya Ram Gupta passed away and his son Ranjeet Kumar has been examined as PW-8. As
PW-8-Ranjeet Kumar was acquainted with the hand-writing of his father-Siya Ram Gupta, the
report of hand- writing expert Siya Ram Gupta has been marked through his son- PW-8. The
investigation revealed that the appellant had forged the signature on the delivery slip-Ex.-P4. On
completion of investigation, charge sheet has been filed against the appellant- accused under
Sections 420, 467 and 468 IPC.
5. To prove the charges against the appellant, the prosecution has examined PW-1-Dr. K.B.
Varshney, PW-2-Devesh Mohan, PW- 3- Dr. M.L. Varshney, hand-writing expert-PW-5-M.Y. Khan,
PW-8- Ranjeet Kumar, son of another hand-writing expert-Siya Ram Gupta and other witnesses.
Upon consideration of the oral and documentary evidence, the trial court noted that three
hand-writing experts are on record. According to one expert, the disputed signature has been made
by Devesh Mohan-PW-2. The trial court also noted that the other two experts have mentioned in
their reports that the disputed signature “Q-1” in delivery slip do not match with the specimen
signatures “S-1 to S-6”. The trial court held that the appellant being the Postman did the work of
delivery of registry and the delivery slip was kept with him therefore, the conclusion is that the
appellant made the signature of “D. Mohan” in the delivery slip. The trial court held that the
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
2

appellant frequently used to visit the house of the complainant-PW-1 by taking registries and letters
and thus, he was well-acquainted with the signature of PW-2-Devesh Mohan. Based upon the
evidence of PWs 1 to 3 and the reports of hand-writing experts, the trial court held that the appellant
had committed the offence of forgery and convicted him under Sections 467 and 468 IPC and
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment of four years and three years respectively. Both
the sentences were directed to run concurrently.
6. Challenging the conviction, the appellant has filed an appeal before the appellate court –
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow. The appellate court dismissed the appeal by holding
that upon proper analysis of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the trial court has rightly
convicted the appellant under Sections 467 and 468 IPC.
7. Being aggrieved, the appellant filed Criminal Revision No.511 of 2006 before the High Court of
Allahabad which came to be dismissed by the impugned judgment. The High Court held that the
prosecution has adduced evidence proving that the signature of “D. Mohan” in the delivery slip and
the specimen signatures of PW-2-Devesh Mohan differs. The High Court further held that the
appellant was the person who delivered the envelope and in such circumstances, it is for the
appellant to explain as to who signed the disputed signature and in the absence of any such
explanation from the appellant, the presumption is to be raised against the appellant that he is the
only person having knowledge of the same. The revision was accordingly dismissed and the
conviction of the appellant was affirmed.
8. Assailing the impugned judgment, Mr. Saurabh Mishra, learned counsel for the appellant has
contended that without proving that the appellant has forged the signature in Ex.-P4- delivery slip,
the conviction of the appellant under Sections 467 and 468 IPC cannot be sustained. Learned
counsel further submitted that the courts below erred in not considering that the Government
hand-writing expert’s report was in favour of the appellant. It was submitted that in the absence of
examination of hand-writing expert Siya Ram Gupta who gave the opinion, the report of Siya Ram
Gupta cannot be proved by examining his son-Ranjeet Kumar-PW-8 and the courts below ought not
to have placed reliance upon the opinion of the hand-writing expert-PW-5-M.Y. Khan and another
hand-writing expert Siya Ram Gupta. It was contended that the High Court erred in holding that it
is for the appellant to prove as to who signed in Ex.-P4-delivery slip and the High Court erred in
raising the presumption against the appellant and the conviction of the appellant is not sustainable.
9. On the other hand, Mr. Adarsh Upadhyay, learned counsel for the respondent-State has
submitted that upon proper appreciation of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the courts below
rightly convicted the appellant. It was submitted that the prosecution relies upon not merely on the
opinion of the hand-writing experts, but the evidence of PW-2-Devesh Mohan, son of
complainant-Dr. K.B. Varshney (PW-1) who has denied having put his signature in Ex.- P4-delivery
slip and the prosecution has well established the guilt of the appellant.
10. We have carefully considered the submissions and perused the impugned judgment and other
materials on record.
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
3

11. By adducing the evidence of Dr. M.L. Varshney (PW-3), the prosecution has proved that on
09.04.1992, PW-3 had sent a registered envelope No.0095 to PW-1-Dr. K.B. Varshney, Indira
Nagar, Lucknow. When PW-1 did not receive the said envelope, on 27.04.1992, PW-3 complained
the same to the concerned Sub-Post Office, Naini, Allahabad. PW-1-Dr. K.B. Varshney also filed a
complaint on 29.04.1992 to the Senior Superintendent, Department of Posts, Lucknow. After
investigation, it was learnt that on 14.05.1992, a person named Mohan has received the aforesaid
registry on 13.04.1992.
12. In his evidence, son of the complainant-PW-2-Devesh Kumar has stated that the registry is said
to have been received at his house on 13.04.1992 and on the said date, he was not present at home as
he had gone for coaching at 10:00 am and had come back to the house at about 04:00 pm. On being
shown the delivery slip- Ex.-P4, PW-2 clearly denied that it does not bear his signature. PW- 2
further stated that the appellant had brought the registry and his mother had received them. It is to
be pointed out that neither the name of “Devesh Mohan” nor the name of “mother of PW-2” was
written on the distribution slip; but some other thing had been written. The evidence of PW-2
denying his signature in Ex.-P4- delivery slip is a valuable piece of evidence supporting the case of
the prosecution. The courts below rightly recorded the concurrent findings that by the evidence of
PW-2, the prosecution has clearly established that PW-2-Devesh Mohan had not put the signature
in Ex.-P4-delivery slip.
13. The prosecution relies upon the reports of the hand-writing experts only to corroborate the
evidence of PW-2-Devesh Mohan. Of course, hand-writing expert’s report by the Government
Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow has stated that the person who has written the specimen
signatures “S-1 to S-6” had written the disputed signature “Q-1” in Ex.-P4-delivery slip. The report
of the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow is in favour of the appellant. But as rightly pointed out
by the courts below that since the hand- writing expert from the Forensic Science Laboratory,
Lucknow had not been examined, the said report cannot be looked into. It is pertinent to note that
the appellant-accused had also not summoned the hand-writing expert from the Government
Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow to substantiate his defence.
14. Be that as it may, the hand-writing expert-M.Y. Khan (PW-5) in his report-Ex.-P9 has stated that
the person who had written the specimen signatures “S-1 to S-6” had not written the disputed
signature “Q-1” in Ex.-P4-delivery slip and that the same is different from the signature of
PW-2-Devesh Mohan. In his report, PW-5 had also explained as to how the disputed signature does
not match with the specimen signatures of PW-2-Devesh Mohan. Likewise, in his report,
hand-writing expert Siya Ram Gupta had also opined that the disputed signature in Ex.-P4-delivery
slip has not been written by PW-2-Devesh Mohan. By the time when the trial was taken up,
hand-writing expert Siya Ram Gupta passed away and his son- Ranjeet Kumar (PW-8) who was
acquainted with the hand-writing of Siya Ram Gupta was examined to mark the report.
15. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that without independent and reliable
corroboration, the opinion of the hand- writing experts cannot be relied upon to base the conviction.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon S. Gopal
Reddy v. State of A.P. (1996) 4 SCC 596, wherein the Supreme Court held as under:-
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
4

“28. Thus, the evidence of PW 3 is not definite and cannot be said to be of a clinching
nature to connect the appellant with the disputed letters. The evidence of an expert is
a rather weak type of evidence and the courts do not generally consider it as offering
‘conclusive’ proof and therefore safe to rely upon the same without seeking
independent and reliable corroboration. In Magan Bihari Lal v. State of Punjab
(1977) 2 SCC 210, while dealing with the evidence of a handwriting expert, this Court
opined:
“… We think it would be extremely hazardous to condemn the appellant merely on
the strength of opinion evidence of a handwriting expert. It is now well settled that
expert opinion must always be received with great caution and perhaps none so with
more caution than the opinion of a handwriting expert. There is a profusion of
precedential authority which holds that it is unsafe to base a conviction solely on
expert opinion without substantial corroboration. This rule has been universally
acted upon and it has almost become a rule of law. It was held by this Court in Ram
Chandra v. State of U.P. AIR 1957 SC 381 that it is unsafe to treat expert handwriting
opinion as sufficient basis for conviction, but it may be relied upon when supported
by other items of internal and external evidence. This Court again pointed out in
Ishwari Prasad Misra v. Mohd. Isa AIR 1963 SC 1728 that expert evidence of
handwriting can never be conclusive because it is, after all, opinion evidence, and this
view was reiterated in Shashi Kumar Banerjee v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee AIR 1964
SC 529 where it was pointed out by this Court that expert’s evidence as to
handwriting being opinion evidence can rarely, if ever, take the place of substantive
evidence and before acting on such evidence, it would be desirable to consider
whether it is corroborated either by clear direct evidence or by circumstantial
evidence. This Court had again occasion to consider the evidentiary value of expert
opinion in regard to handwriting in Fakhruddin v. State of M.P. AIR 1967 SC 1326
and it uttered a note of caution pointing out that it would be risky to found a
conviction solely on the evidence of a handwriting expert and before acting upon such
evidence, the court must always try to see whether it is corroborated by other
evidence, direct or circumstantial.”
16. Of course, it is not safe to base the conviction solely on the evidence of the hand-writing expert.
As held by the Supreme Court in Magan Bihari Lal v. State of Punjab (1977) 2 SCC 210 that “expert
opinion must always be received with great caution……..it is unsafe to base a conviction solely on
expert opinion without substantial corroboration. This rule has been universally acted upon and it
has almost become a rule of law.”
17. It is fairly well settled that before acting upon the opinion of the hand-writing expert, prudence
requires that the court must see that such evidence is corroborated by other evidence either direct or
circumstantial evidence. In Murari Lal v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1980) 1 SCC 704, the Supreme
Court held as under:-
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
5

“4. …….True, it has occasionally been said on very high authority that it would be
hazardous to base a conviction solely on the opinion of a handwriting expert. But, the
hazard in accepting the opinion of any expert, handwriting expert or any other kind
of expert, is not because experts, in general, are unreliable witnesses — the quality of
credibility or incredibility being one which an expert shares with all other witnesses
— but because all human judgment is fallible and an expert may go wrong because of
some defect of observation, some error of premises or honest mistake of conclusion.
The more developed and the more perfect a science, the less the chance of an
incorrect opinion and the converse if the science is less developed and imperfect. The
science of identification of finger-prints has attained near perfection and the risk of
an incorrect opinion is practically non-existent. On the other hand, the science of
identification of handwriting is not nearly so perfect and the risk is, therefore, higher.
But that is a far cry from doubting the opinion of a handwriting expert as an
invariable rule and insisting upon substantial corroboration in every case, howsoever
the opinion may be backed by the soundest of reasons. It is hardly fair to an expert to
view his opinion with an initial suspicion and to treat him as an inferior sort of
witness. His opinion has to be tested by the acceptability of the reasons given by him.
An expert deposes and not decides. His duty “is to furnish the Judge with the
necessary scientific criteria for testing the accuracy of his conclusion, so as to enable
the Judge to form his own independent judgment by the application of these criteria
to the facts proved in evidence (Vide Lord President Cooper in Davis v. Edindurgh
Magistrate, 1953 SC 34 quoted by Professor Cross in his evidence).”
5. …….
6. Expert testimony is made relevant by Section 45 of the Evidence Act and where the
Court has to form an opinion upon a point as to identity of handwriting, the opinion
of a person “specially skilled” “in questions as to identity of handwriting” is expressly
made a relevant fact……… So, corroboration may not invariably be insisted upon
before acting on the opinion of an handwriting expert and there need be no initial
suspicion. But, on the facts of a particular case, a court may require corroboration of
a varying degree. There can be no hard and fast rule, but nothing will justify the
rejection of the opinion of an expert supported by unchallenged reasons on the sole
ground that it is not corroborated. The approach of a court while dealing with the
opinion of a handwriting expert should be to proceed cautiously, probe the reasons
for the opinion, consider all other relevant evidence and decide finally to accept or
reject it.”
18. As pointed out earlier, the hand-writing experts - M.Y. Khan (PW-5) and Siya Ram Gupta have
opined that the disputed signature-“Q-1” in the delivery slip-Ex.-P4 does not match with the
specimen signatures-“S-1 to S-6”. Hand-writing experts have also opined that the one who wrote the
specimen signatures had not written the disputed signature “Q-1” in Ex.-P4. As pointed out by the
courts below, the evidence of hand-writing expert is the evidence relied upon by the prosecution to
corroborate the evidence of PW-2- Devesh Mohan who has denied his signature in Ex.-P4. Learned
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
6

counsel for the appellant is not right in contending that the courts below have based the conviction
solely upon the opinion of the hand-writing experts. The evidence of hand-writing experts is only a
corroborative piece of evidence to corroborate the evidence of PW- 2-Devesh Mohan.
19. In the light of the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 and other evidence, the High Court rightly found that
the appellant who delivered the registered envelope at the place of the complainant-PW-1 is bound
to explain as to who made the alleged signature in Ex.-P4-delivery slip. In the absence of any
explanation by the appellant-accused, as held by the High Court, a presumption is to be raised
against the appellant who delivered the envelope as he is the only person having knowledge of the
same. From the evidence of PW-3-Dr. M.L. Varshney, the prosecution has proved that the envelope
contained valuable security-four Indira Vikas Patra of value of each Rs.5,000/- totalling
Rs.20,000/-. Upon appreciation of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the courts below rightly
recorded the concurrent findings that the appellant has forged the signature of PW-2-Devesh
Mohan and the conviction of the appellant under Sections 467 and 468 IPC is based upon the
evidence and the conviction does not suffer from any infirmity warranting interference.
20. For the conviction under Section 467 IPC, the appellant has been sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for four years and for the conviction under Section 468 IPC, the appellant has been
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for three years along with fine of Rs.500/-. The occurrence was
of the year 1992. As seen from the custody certificate, the appellant has been in custody from
04.07.2018 i.e. for a period of more than eighteen months. Considering that the occurrence was of
the year 1992 and the facts and circumstances of the case, the sentence of imprisonment imposed
upon the appellant is reduced to the period already undergone.
21. In the result, the conviction of the appellant-accused under Sections 467 and 468 IPC is
confirmed and the sentence of imprisonment imposed on him is reduced to the period already
undergone. The impugned judgment dated 19.02.2018 passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad in Criminal Revision No.511 of 2006 is accordingly modified and the appeal is partly
allowed. The appellant-accused is ordered to be released forthwith unless his presence is required in
any other case.
………………………..J. [R. BANUMATHI] ………………………..J. [A.S. BOPANNA] New Delhi;
January 14, 2020.
Padum Kumar vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 14 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90407836/
7
