Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on
28 July, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3815, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
664
Author: Surya Kant
Bench: Krishna Murari, Surya Kant, N.V. Ramana
                                                                            REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 283 of 2011
       Parminder Kaur @ P.P. Kaur @ Soni                             ..... Appellants(s)
                                                 VERSUS
       State of Punjab                                              .....Respondents(s)
                                               JUDGMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
1. The present Criminal Appeal has been preferred by Parminder Kaur, impugning the judgment
dated 30.11.2009 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana through which her challenge to a
judgment dated 27.02.1999 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Barnala was turned down,
thereby confirming her conviction of three years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. 2000 under
Sections 366A and 506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC”).
FACTS & CASE HISTORY
2. The prosecution story, as recorded in the FIR at around noon on 24.02.1996, was that the
appellant was a single lady living with her child, mother and a young boy as her tenant in the
neighbourhood of Page | 1 the prosecutrix’s1 house. About a week prior to registration of the police
complaint, the appellant called the prosecutrix to her house and tried to entice her to indulge in
illicit intercourse with the rich tenant boy in return for clothes and trips from him. The appellant at
about 6.00 A.M. on 19.02.1996, allegedly pushed the visiting prosecutrix into the room occupied by
the tenant boy and bolted it from the outside. It was only on hearing the prosecutrix’s screams that
after five minutes the door was unlocked, with her father (Hari Singh, PW−
2), Bhan Singh and Karnail Singh standing outside. Swiftly, the boy ran out of the room and
successfully escaped. Upon the prosecutrix emerging from the room, her father protested and
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
1

expressed his dismay to the by−standing appellant. Scared for their reputation, the prosecutrix and
her father returned to their home without reporting the matter to anyone, except the prosecutrix’s
mother. However, on 24.02.1996 at 7.00 A.M., the appellant caught hold of the prosecutrix outside
her house and threatened to kill her brother if anyone was informed of the matter. The prosecutrix
was able to escape the appellant’s clutches and worried at this high−handedness, proceeded with her
father towards the police station to report these two incidents and lodged a complaint.
3. During trial, the prosecution examined five witnesses, including The name of the
prosecutrix/victim has been withheld, in compliance with the ratio in Bhupinder Sharma v. State of
Himachal Pradesh, (2003) 8 SCC 551.
Page | 2 the prosecutrix (PW−1), her father (PW−2), the draftsman who prepared the site plan (PW−
3), the headmistress who proved the prosecutrix’s age (PW−4) and the investigating officer (PW−5).
The appellant, in turn, both denied all allegations and examined one witness of her own – a
neighbour, Gurnail Singh (DW−1) and offered an alternate version in her statement under Section
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“CrPC”), claiming that there was no tenant at all in her
home and that the complaint was nothing but motivated revenge at the instance of one Bhola Singh
against whom she had levelled allegations of rape a few months ago.
4. This alternate version was summarily rejected by the trial Court which concluded that the
appellant’s claim of the complaint being at the instance of Bhola Singh was unlikely both because
malicious prosecution of sexual abuses involving minors, at the instance of third parties, was
improbable; and even DW−1 in his cross−examination had admitted that Hari Singh was a
permanent employee of the Irrigation Department and could not be a Karinda (employee) of Bhola
Singh as claimed by the appellant.
5. Relying upon the school records produced by DW−4, the Court observed that the prosecutrix was
studying in Class VII with date of birth as 12.04.1982, thereby unimpeachably making her a minor.
Without delving into the elements of Section 366A or 506 IPC, or Page | 3 whether each individual
ingredient had been satisfied by the prosecution, the learned Additional Sessions Judge focused on
negating the defences projected by the appellant. In response to the contradictions between
important aspects of the prosecutrix and her father’s testimonies, like differences in physical
description and antecedents of the male tenant and the inability of the witnesses and the police to
catch or trace the boy, the trial Court instead noted that there was no reason to disbelieve the
prosecutrix and her father. The five−day delay in registration of the FIR was condoned for having
arisen out of natural fear of reputation of the prosecutrix and her family, as well as the mild severity
of the case. Similarly, the non− examination of the other two independent witnesses, Bhan Singh
and Karnail Singh was ignored as being normal reluctance of bystanders in cases where there was no
rape or assault.
6. Accordingly, the trial Court held that the appellant had intentionally induced the prosecutrix to
perform illicit intercourse with her male tenant, and that she had also criminally intimidated the
prosecutrix by threatening her family member. Noting the large number of dependents that the
appellant had to support as a single lady, and considering the lack of commission of any assault or
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
2

rape against the prosecutrix, the appellant was concurrently sentenced to three years rigorous
imprisonment and fine of Rs 2,000 (or further six Page | 4 months rigorous imprisonment in lieu
thereof) under Section 366A, and one year rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1,000 (or further
three months rigorous imprisonment in lieu thereof) under Section 506 of IPC.
7. The aggrieved appellant approached the High Court which too refused to interfere with the order
of conviction. While dismissing the appeal, the High Court observed that the statement of the
accused under Section 313 CrPC appeared to be an after−thought, and that in the absence of any
evidence proving enmity between the parties it was impossible that anyone would falsely implicate a
woman in such like offence. The minority of the prosecutrix was noted as having been proved, and
the testimonies of PW1 and PW2 were held to be impeccable and corroborating each other
completely. Similar to the trial Court, the High Court also explained−away the delay in registration
of FIR as a result of family reputation put at stake in matters of sexual offence cases. Other
omissions in the form of non− examination of Bhan Singh and Hari Singh and failure to catch or
trace the identity of the male tenant were deemed insignificant and immaterial.
CONTENTIONS OF PARTIES
8. The judgments of the trial Court and High Court have been elegantly assailed before us by learned
counsel for the appellant who Page | 5 contended that the testimonies of the two star−witnesses,
being full of material contradictions, are far from reliable. The delay in registration of the FIR and
the lack of any attempt to catch or even later trace the male tenant showed that the story was
concocted by the prosecutrix’s family with ulterior motives. Reliance was also placed on the denial
and alternate version put forth by the appellant in her statement under Section 313 CrPC, and the
failure of the Courts below to either examine such statutory statement in−depth or for the
prosecution to belie it effectively. Emphasis was laid on the statement of DW−1 who volunteered
during his cross−examination that PW−2 was then living in the house owned by Bhola Singh, the
person against whom the appellant had alleged rape. The deleterious effect of these proceedings on
Bhola Singh’s trial and his subsequent acquittal on grounds that Parminder Kaur (the appellant
here) was a lady of questionable character who indulged in trafficking of minors, was highlighted to
show colourable motive behind registration of this case against the appellant.
9. On the contrary, learned state counsel supported the impugned judgment(s) by placing emphasis
on the concurrent findings of the Courts below. Reliance was also placed on PW−2’s cross−
examination wherein he himself denied knowing Bhola Singh, to counter the allegation of false
implication by the prosecutrix.
Page | 6 ANALYSIS I. Sweeping generalisations and superficial analysis
10. Having heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable length through video conferencing,
we find from the impugned orders that the Courts below failed in making the desired attempt to
delve deep into the factual matrix of this case. Many aspects, as discussed hereunder, have
completely been ignored or only dealt with hastily. Further, the reasoning is generic and is premised
upon generalisations which may not be necessarily true always. It is indisputable that parents would
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
3

not ordinarily endanger the reputation of their minor daughter merely to falsely implicate their
opponents, but such clichés ought not to be the sole basis of dismissing reasonable doubts created
and/or defences set out by the accused.
11. Similarly, the five−day delay in registration of the FIR, in the facts and circumstances of this
case, gains importance as the father of the victim is an eye−witness to a part of the occurrence. It is
difficult to appreciate that a father would await a second incident to happen before moving the law
into motion. Sweeping assumptions concerning delays in registration of FIRs for sexual offences,
send a problematic signal to society and create opportunities for abuse by miscreants. Instead, the
facts of each individual case and the behaviour of the parties involved ought to be analysed by courts
before reaching a Page | 7 conclusion on the reason and effect of delay in registration of FIR. In the
facts of the present case, neither is Section 366A by itself a sexual offence in the strict sense nor do
the inactions of the prosecutrix or her father inspire confidence on genuineness of the prosecution
story. No steps were taken to avail of medical examination of the victim, nor was the Panchayat or
any social forum approached for any form of redress till the occurrence of the second alleged
incident.
12. Further, it is beyond comprehension that the prosecutrix’s father and his two male associates
failed to stop the tenant boy who was allegedly about to commit a sexual offence with the minor
victim and neither did they later make any attempt to even register a complaint against him.
Strangely, the prosecution has acquiesced to such disappearance of the boy from the scene. Still
further, the father of the prosecutrix merely registered his protest to the appellant on the scene,
instead of reacting instinctively and approaching police authorities when faced with possible
trafficking of his daughter. This conduct of belatedly proceeding against only the prosecutrix creates
a lurking suspicion against the prosecution case and it may not be totally improbable to infer that it
was a malicious attempt at the behest of Bhola Singh to falsely implicate a weak rape victim and
stifle her ability to seek justice.
   II.     Shoddy investigation and prosecution
                                                                  Page | 8
13. The original record elucidates the lack of serious effort on part of either the investigation agency
or the prosecutor to bring home the appellant’s guilt. Save for the initiative of the prosecutrix and
her father to register the complaint, no substantive evidence has been gathered by the police.
Despite the male tenant having been residing with the appellant allegedly for many months, the
police were unable to even discover his name, let alone his antecedents or location. Further, DW−1
casts an impressionable doubt on the existence of the boy in the first place. This is further buttressed
by the fact that PW−1 and PW−2 differed in their physical description of the boy’s age, clothing and
his whereabouts. If the boy was indeed a tenant and if he did live there for months, it is highly
mootable that he couldn’t have been traced.
14. The spot map prepared by PW−3 also has glaring omissions. The location of Bhan Singh’s house
and the place where the appellant allegedly threatened the prosecutrix on 24.02.1996 are not even
marked. Letters which the prosecutrix alleged in her examination−in− chief and police complaint
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
4

that the appellant got written from her, have not been produced during trial. These could have shed
light on the relationship between the accused, prosecutrix and the male tenant prior to the incident.
It is the duty of the prosecution to lead the best evidence in its possession, and failure to do so ought
to lead to an Page | 9 adverse inference.2
15. Non−examination of Bhan Singh and Karnail Singh is also a noticeable lapse, given the gaps in
the prosecution story. It appears that no serious attempt was made to get them examined to resolve
the contradictions in the testimonies of PW−1 and PW−2. Such lack of examination of material
independent witnesses, adversely affects the case of the prosecution. This Court in Takhaji Hiraji v.
Thakore Kubersing Chamansing and others3, viewed that:
“19. … It is true that if a material witness, who would unfold the genesis of the
incident or an essential part of the prosecution case, not convincingly brought to fore
otherwise, or where there is a gap or infirmity in the prosecution case which could
have been supplied or made good by examining a witness who though available is not
examined, the prosecution case can be termed as suffering from a deficiency and
withholding of such a material witness would oblige the court to draw an adverse
inference against the prosecution by holding that if the witness would have been
examined it would not have supported the prosecution case. ...” III. Gross mis−
appreciation of conflicting testimonies
16. Ordinarily, the Supreme Court ought not to re−appreciate evidence. However, where the courts
below have dealt with the material−on−record in a cavalier or mechanical manner which is likely to
cause gross injustice, then this Court in such exceptional Musauddin Ahmed v. State of Assam,
(2009) 14 SCC 541, ¶ 11−15. (2001) 6 SCC 145.
Page | 10 circumstances may justifiably re−appraise the evidence to advance the cause of justice.
There is no gainsaying that such re−assessment ought not to take place routinely and ought not to
become substitution of an otherwise plausible view taken by the Courts below.
17. The trial Court has summarily disregarded the contradictions highlighted by the defense side, on
the premise that such contradictions had no material bearing and that there was no reason to
disbelieve the prosecutrix. The High Court too has opined that PW−1 and PW−2 have completely
corroborated each other and their testimonies were impeccable. These reasons, in our considered
opinion, are not only contrary to the record but they also lead to an impermissible reversal of the
burden of proof imposed in criminal trials. There are numerous clear contradictions between the
testimonies of these two star−witnesses, which we find fatal to the prosecution case.
18. First, PW−1 states that when the door was unlocked from outside, only her father (PW−2) and
Bhan Singh were present outside. However, this contradicts both the information she gave in the
police complaint and the testimony of her father (PW−2) who states that additionally a third person,
Karnail Singh, was also present. Second, the prosecutrix’s description of the male tenant differs
significantly from that of her father. Whereas PW−1 estimated his age at about 26 Page | 11 years
and described him as wearing a pant−shirt, PW−2 believed the boy to be 18−19 years’ old and
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
5

wearing a banian, underwear and dirty shirt. Third, on the antecedents of the anonymous boy, the
prosecutrix stated that he was residing with the appellant for a year, whereas this period was
materially less at only 2−3 months per her father. Fourth, whereas prosecutrix claimed that her
father and Bhan Singh unsuccessfully attempted to catch the tenant while he was escaping from the
room, PW−2 himself states that he was too perplexed to either run or raise any alarm. Fifth and
most notably, on the point of recording of the FIR, the testimonies of PW−1, PW−2 and PW−5 all
differ noticeably. Whereas PW−1 claims that the complaint was recorded by PW−5 while sitting on a
“patthar” (stone), PW−2 claims that the same was recorded by PW−5 while sitting on a “concrete
bench” in the waiting shed of a bus stand in the presence of two other policemen. Most intriguingly,
PW−5 gives an entirely third version, claiming that he was present at the bus stand with five other
police officials and that the statement was written not by him but by another ASI, who placed the
papers on the bonnet of the jeep while standing.
19. In addition to these inconsistencies which cast a serious shadow of doubt over the version of
events put forth by the prosecution, the accounts of PW−1 and PW−2 are superficial and lack detail.
Important links of the story, including what happened in the crucial five minutes Page | 12 when the
girl was locked inside the room or how the male tenant reacted, are missing.
20. Similarly, other links of the story are grossly inconsistent and don’t fit with each other. PW−2
admits to being not at home and instead outside Bhan Singh’s house during the initial part of the
incident, which as per the prosecutrix’s statement was a 10−minute walk from the spot of the crime.
It is thus unlikely that PW−2 could have heard the prosecutrix’s screams from such afar or could
have covered such a significant distance in less than five minutes as claimed by PW−1. There are,
thus, mutual contradictions in the prosecution story.
IV. Failure to refute Section 313 CrPC statement
21. Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 after the prosecution closes its evidence and
examines all its witnesses, the accused is given an opportunity of explanation through Section 313(1)
(b). Any alternate version of events or interpretation proffered by the accused must be carefully
analysed and considered by the trial Court in compliance with the mandate of Section 313(4). Such
opportunity is a valuable right of the accused to seek justice and defend oneself. Failure of the trial
Court to fairly apply its mind and consider the defence, could endanger the conviction itself. 4
Unlike the prosecution Reena Hazarika v. State of Assam, (2019) 13 SCC 289, ¶ 19.
Page | 13 which needs to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt, the accused merely needs to create
reasonable doubt or prove their alternate version by mere preponderance of probabilities. 5 Thus,
once a plausible version has been put forth in defence at the Section 313 CrPC examination stage,
then it is for the prosecution to negate such defense plea.
22. In the case at hand, the alternate version given by the appellant could not be lightly brushed
aside. Her two−part defence, put succinctly, was that first there was no male tenant at all and no one
except for her child and mother lived with her, and second, that she was being falsely implicated as
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
6

vengeance for filing a rape complaint against one Bhola Singh with whom the prosecutrix’s father
used to work.
23. It is revealed that a rape complaint had indeed been made by the appellant against Bhola Singh
approximately seven months previous to the present incident. Not only did she face difficulties in
registering an FIR of rape with the police, but she also had to take pains in filing a private complaint
and prosecuting the case against such third party. In fact, the effect of these proceedings was in line
with the appellant’s defence, for in that rape trial the trial Court drew a damning observation against
her character (calling her a child trafficker) owing to these proceedings.
M Abbas v. State of Kerala, (2001) 10 SCC 103, ¶ 10.
Page | 14
24. Lastly, DW−1, who lived in the neighbourhood of the parties, both supported the appellant’s
claim that there was no male tenant in her home and created sufficiently reasonable connection
between Bhola Singh and the prosecutrix’s father by volunteering that PW−2 was residing in Bhola
Singh’s premises. Reliance on mere admission by DW−1 during cross−examination that PW−2 was a
government employee, neither negates the defense of false implication nor does it imply that PW−2
couldn’t be working with Bhola Singh in a part− time/casual capacity or staying in Bhola Singh’s
house. Thus, the trial Court’s analysis of the appellant’s Section 313 defence ought to have been
deeper, before concluding it as being false or untrustworthy.
V. Charge of Criminal Intimidation
25. Proving the intention of the appellant to cause alarm or compel doing/abstaining from some act,
and not mere utterances of words, is a pre−requisite of successful conviction under Section 506 of
IPC. 6 The trial Court has undertaken no such separate analysis or recorded any finding on this
count, thus calling into question the conviction for criminal intimidation. Further, the nature of this
charge is such that it is a derivative of the main charge of ‘procuration of minor girls’. Given the facts
of this case where the common testimony of PW−1 on both Manik Taneja & Anr. v. State of
Karnataka & Anr., (2015) 7 SCC 423, ¶ 12.
Page | 15 charges has been doubted, it would be unwise to rely upon it as the sole piece of evidence
to convict the appellant for criminal intimidation without any other corroboration.7 CONCLUSION
26. We are thus of the considered view that the prosecution has failed to discharge its burden of
proving the guilt of the appellant under Section 366A and 506 of the IPC beyond reasonable doubt.
Thus, for the reasons aforesaid, the appeal is allowed and the conviction and sentence awarded by
the Courts below are set aside. The appellant is acquitted and consequently set free.
…………………………….. J.
(N.V. RAMANA) …………………………… J.
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
7

(SURYA KANT) …………………………...J. (KRISHNA MURARI) NEW DELHI DATED : 28.07.2020
Kamij Shaikh v. Emperor, AIR 1948 Pat 73, ¶ 5.
Page | 16
Parminder Kaur @ P.P.Kaur @ Soni vs The State Of Punjab on 28 July, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161918875/
8
