Prabhakar Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 January,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 96, (2020) 1 RECCRIR 831 (2020) 2
SCALE 448, (2020) 2 SCALE 448
Author: Aniruddha Bose
Bench: Aniruddha Bose, Deepak Gupta
                                                  1
                                                              Non− Reportable
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.153 OF 2020
          (arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.9207/2019)
          Prabhakar Tewari                                        …..Appellant
                                            Versus
          State of U.P. & Anr.                                 …..Respondents
                                               WITH
                                 Criminal Appeal No.154 OF 2020
                              (arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.)No.9209/2019)
                                         JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
Leave granted in both the appeals.
2. These appeals arise out of two orders passed by the High Court on 11th September, 2019 granting
bail to two accused persons, Vikram Singh@ Vikki (in SLP(Crl.) No.9207/2019) and Malkhan Singh
(in SLP(Crl.) No.9209/2019) arraigned in a criminal case initiated on the basis of a First
Information Report dated 7th February 2009. The said report was made by Prabhakar Tewari, being
the appellant (in both the appeals) in Police Station Jagadishpur in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
3. The appellant is the son of the deceased victim, Purushottam Dutt Tiwari. He was assaulted by
gunshots on 7 th February, 2019 at about 4.00 p.m. while returning to his residence after attending
the Court in connection with a case. In the first appeal (i.e. SLP(Crl.)No.9207 of 2019), the appellant
assails the order granting bail to Vikram Singh @ Vikky by the High Court. In the statement of the
appellant recorded in the evening on the date of occurrence at about 8.40 p.m., five persons have
been named as direct assailants. Said Vikram Singh in the First Information Report has been named
Prabhakar Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143984474/
1

as the person by whom the “incident has been committed”. In his statement recorded on the next
day i.e. 8 th February, 2019, the appellant had named Vikram Singh as the person who had
conspired to commit the said crime. Vikram Singh was taken into custody on 19th March 2019. The
High Court, while granting bail to the accused Vikram Singh recorded the submission of his learned
counsel as also that of the learned A.G.A., who had opposed the prayer for bail, in the following
terms:-
“Learned counsel for the applicant submits that accused applicant has falsely been
implicated in the present case. It is further submitted that statement of independent
witness Narendra Dev Upadhyay was recorded after a span of 52 days and in his
statement, he has categorically stated he has overheard the applicant planning for the
alleged incident thereby indicating criminal conspiracy on the part of the applicant.
There is no incriminating evidence against the applicant on record. It is also
submitted that no recovery has been shown against the applicant. The accused
applicant is languishing in jail since 19.03.2019. It has been pointed out that the
applicant has criminal history which has been duly explained in the rejoinder
affidavits. It is further submitted that there is no possibility of the applicant of fleeing
away from judicial custody or tampering with the witnesses. In case the applicant is
enlarged on bail, he shall not misuse the liberty of bail.
Learned A.G.A. opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the aforesaid facts
as argued by the learned counsel for the applicant.”
4. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the accused Vikram Singh is
involved in at least five other criminal cases under the same Police Station,
Jagdishpur. He has also brought to our notice the witness statement of one Narendra
Dev Upadhyay. This statement was recorded on 29 th March 2019. The part of his
statement to which our attention has been drawn by learned counsel for the appellant
records that the said witness saw Vikram Singh standing near National Highway 56
Flyover on the date of occurrence of the incident in Warisganj with 6 or 7 accomplices
and all of them were talking about plans of killing the victim.
Learned Counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh supported the appellant’s stand. Mr. C.A. Sundram,
learned senior counsel for the accused contested the present appeal. His main argument is that the
statement of Narendra Dev Upadhyay, on which reliance was placed by the prosecution and the
appellant was recorded after fifty days from the date of occurrence of the incident. On the question
of granting bail, Mr. Sundram has argued, such a statement was unreliable. He has also submitted
that even as per the F.I.R. or the witness statements recorded under Section 161 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, his client was not named as having participated in the act of assault or
being present at the place of occurrence while the assault took place.
5. We have considered the respective submissions. The facts highlighted by the appellant are that
the case involves offence under Section 302 read with Sections 120-B/34, 147, 148 and 149 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860. The accused has several criminal cases pending against him and has been
Prabhakar Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143984474/
2

named in the statement forming the basis of the FIR on the date of occurrence itself. Two
individuals, Rahul Tiwari and Narendra Dev Upadhyay, whose statements have been recorded
under Section 161 of the 1973 Code also refer to involvement of the accused Vikram Singh.
6. In the case of Mahipal Vs. Rajesh Kumar @ Polia & Anr. (Criminal Appeal No.1843 of 2019)
decided on 5 th December, 2019, a coordinate Bench of this Court has discussed the scope of
jurisdiction of the appellate Court in setting aside an order of granting bail. The two key factors for
interfering with such an order are non-application of mind on the part of the Court granting bail or
the opinion of the Court in granting bail is not borne out from a prima facie view of the evidence on
record. In the case of Maulana Mohammed Amir Rashadi vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
[(2012) 2 SCC 382], a two Judge Bench of this Court declined to interfere with an order of the High
Court granting bail to an accused having considered the factual features of that case.
7. On considering the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties. Having regard to the
circumstances of this case, in our opinion, there has been no wrong or improper exercise of
discretion on the part of the High Court in granting bail to the accused. The factors outlined in the
case of Mahipal (supra) for testing the legality of an order granting bail are absent in the order
impugned. The materials available do not justify arriving at the conclusion that the order impugned
suffers from non-application of mind or the reason for granting bail is not borne out from a
prima-facie view of the evidence on record. The offence alleged no doubt is grave and serious and
there are several criminal cases pending against the accused. These factors by themselves cannot be
the basis for refusal of prayer for bail. The High Court has exercised its discretion in granting bail to
the accused Vikram Singh upon considering relevant materials. No ex-facie error in the order has
been shown by the appellant which would establish exercise of such discretion to be improper. We
accordingly sustain the order of the High Court granting bail. This appeal is dismissed.
Criminal Appeal No……../2020 (arising out of SLP(Crl) No.9209/2019)
1. This appeal also has its origin in the same FIR which forms subject matter of SLP(Crl.)
No.9207/2019. The submissions on the basis of which the accused arraigned in the same case was
granted bail would appear from the following passage of the order of the High Court:-
“Learned counsel for the applicant submits that accused applicant has falsely been
implicated in the present case. It is further submitted that the alleged incident took
place on 07.02.2019 and statement of independent witness Narendra Dev Upadhyay
was recorded after a span of 52 days. It is also submitted that there is no recovery
from the applicant, which may lead towards his involvement in the commission of
alleged crime. No specific role has been assigned to the applicant. The accused
applicant is languishing in jail since 12.03.2019. It is next submitted that the
applicant is neither a previous convict nor he has any criminal history. It is further
submitted that there is no possibility of the applicant of fleeting away from judicial
custody or tampering with the witnesses. In case the applicant is enlarged on bail, he
shall not misuse the liberty of bail.
Prabhakar Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143984474/
3

Learned A.G.A. opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the aforesaid fact as argued by the
learned counsel for the applicant.”
2. The accused is Malkhan Singh in this appeal. He was named in the FIR by the appellant
Prabhakar Tewari as one of the five persons who had intercepted the motorcycle on which the
deceased victim was riding, in front of Warisganj Railway Station (Halt) on the highway. All the five
accused persons, including Malkhan Singh, as per the F.I.R. and majority of the witness statements,
had fired several rounds upon the deceased victim. The statement of Rahul Tewari recorded on 15th
March, 2019, Shubham Tewari recorded on 12 th April, 2019 and Mahipam Mishra recorded on
20th April 2019 giving description of the offending incident has been relied upon by the appellant. It
is also submitted that there are other criminal cases pending against him. Learned counsel for the
accused- respondent no.2 has however pointed out the delay in recording the witness statements.
The accused has been in custody for about seven months. In this case also, we find no error or
impropriety in exercise of discretion by the High Court in granting bail to the accused Malkhan
Singh. The reason why we come to this conclusion is broadly the same as in the previous appeal.
This appeal is also dismissed and the order of the High Court is affirmed.
………………………….J. (Deepak Gupta) ………………………….J. (Aniruddha Bose) New Delhi, Dated:
24th January, 2020.
Prabhakar Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143984474/
4
