Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu
on 18 December, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 928
Author: S.A. Bobde
Bench: V. Ramasubramanian, A.S. Bopanna, S.A. Bobde
                                                                                      RE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 611 0F 2020
                         PRADEEP KUMAR SONTHALIA                                … APPELL
                                                         VERSUS
                         DHIRAJ PRASAD SAHU @ DHIRAJ SAHU & ANR.            …RESPONDENT(
                                                          WITH
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2159 OF 2020
                                                    JUDGMENT
S.A. Bobde, CJI
1. An interesting but important question of far-reaching consequence arises for consideration in
these appeals. It is this. “Whether the vote cast by a Member of the Legislative Assembly in an
election to the Rajya Sabha, in the forenoon on the date of election, would become invalid,
consequent upon his disqualification, arising out of a conviction and sentence imposed by a
Criminal Court, in the afternoon on the very same day?” Reason: 2. We have heard learned counsel
for the parties.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
1

3. The brief facts sufficient for answering the issue arising for consideration in these appeals are as
follows: -
(i) By a notification dated 05.03.2018, the Election Commission of India notified the
biennial elections for two seats in the Council of States from the State of Jharkhand;
(ii) Three candidates by name Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia, Samir Uraon and Dhiraj
Prasad Sahu, filed their nominations on 12.03.2018. It is stated that the first two
candidates belonged to the Bharitya Janata Party (BJP), and the third candidate
belonged to the Indian National Congress (INC);
(iii) On 23.03.2018, the election was held between 9.00 A.M. and 4.00 P.M. at the Vidhan Sabha. A
total of 80 members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand cast their votes;
(iv) One Shri Amit Kumar Mahto who was an elected member of the Assembly belonging to
Jharkhand Mukti Morcha Party (JMM) admittedly cast his vote at 9.15 A.M. on 23.03.2018;
(v) As fate (not of the voter but of the contestant) would have it, Shri Amit Kumar Mahto was
convicted by the Court of the Additional Judicial Commissioner XVIII, Ranchi, in Sessions Trial
No.481 of 2010, for the offences punishable under Sections 147, 323/149, 341/149, 353/149,
427/149 and 506/149 IPC, on the same day, but the conviction and sentence were handed over at
2.30 P.M. He was sentenced to various periods of imprisonment for those offences, but all of them
were to run concurrently. The maximum punishment was for the offence under Section 506/149 and
the Court awarded RI for a period of two years;
(vi) Since the election to the Council of States is by a system of proportional representation by
means of single transferable vote, the counting of votes began at 7.30 P.M on 23.03.2018. Out of the
80 votes cast, two were declared invalid by the Returning Officer. The remaining 78 votes, which
were validly cast, were converted into points (at the rate of 100 points per vote) and Pradeep Kumar
Sonthalia was declared to have secured 2599 value of votes, Samir Uraon was declared to have
secured 2601value of votes and Dhiraj Prasad Sahu was declared to have secured 2600 value of
votes. Thus, the election petitioner was declared defeated and the other two, declared duly elected;
(vii) It appears that an objection was lodged at 11.20 P.M. requesting the Returning Officer to
declare the vote cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto invalid, on the basis of the conviction and sentence
imposed in the afternoon on the same day by the Criminal Court;
(viii) However, the Returning Officer went ahead and declared the results at 12.15 A.M. on
24.03.2018. Shri Samir Uraon and Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu were declared by the Returning Officer
to be duly elected and they were also issued with a certificate in Form No. 24 in terms of Rule 85 of
the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961;
(ix) Therefore, Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia, the defeated candidate filed an election petition in
Election Petition No.01/2018, praying for a declaration that the Returning Officer has caused
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
2

improper reception of the void vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto. He also prayed for setting aside the
election of Shri Dheeraj Prasad Sahu with a consequential declaration that the petitioner was duly
elected as a member of Rajya Sabha;
(x) The High Court framed as many as 6 issues for consideration in the Election Petition and they
are as follows: -
1. Whether Shri Amit Kumar Mahto has cast his vote in favour of respondent no. 1 in
Biennial Election to the Council of States, 2018 in connection with State of
Jharkhand?
2. Whether on conviction and sentence of two years in Sessions Trial No. 481 of 2010
by the Additional Judicial Commissioner-XVIII, Ranchi, Shri Amit Kumar Mahto
ceased to be a Member of Legislative Assembly and his disqualification came into
effect immediately from the date of his conviction and sentence of two years and,
therefore, the vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto could not have been taken into
consideration at the time of counting?
3. Whether the disqualification of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto rendered his vote
void/illegal that was cast to respondent no.1 and, therefore, reception of his vote was
improper and, thus, in terms of Section 100 (1) (d)
(iii) of the Representation of People Act, 1951, the election of respondent no. 1 is
liable to be declared void?
4. Whether the communication from the Returning Officer (e-mail dated 24.03.2018)
rejecting the objection made on behalf of the petitioner on the ground that the
Returning Officer had not received the judgment of conviction of Shri Amit Kumar
Mahto till the declaration of the results, is absolutely illegal and unlawful?
5. Whether disqualification of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto in terms of Section 8 (3) of
the Representation of People Act, 1951, takes effect from the date of his conviction
and sentence of two years i.e. 23.03.2018 which means the day as per English
calendar beginning at midnight and covering a period of 24 hours i.e. with effect from
23.03.2018 at 00.00 hours?
6. The respondent no. 1 having been declared to be elected in the Biennial Election to the Council of
States – 2018 by a margin of 0.01 vote and in the event, the vote of Shri Amit Kumar Mahto which
has been received improperly is ignored, then whether the petitioner is entitled to be declared
successful and consequently for being elected as a Member of Rajya Sabha?
(xi) By a judgment dated 17.01.2020, the High Court dismissed the Election Petition, after recording
a finding in favour of the election petitioner on Issue Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 5. On Issue Nos. 4 & 6, the High
Court did not record any finding.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
3

(xii) Despite deciding Issue Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 5 in favour of the election petitioner, the High Court
refused to grant any relief to the election petitioner, primarily on the ground that the election to the
Council of States by a system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote, is
a highly complex, technical issue and that it is not possible for the Court to find out whether the
election petitioner could have won the election, if that one vote had been rejected;
(xiii) Finding that the surgery was successful but the patient died, the election petitioner has come
up with one appeal in Civil Appeal No.611 of 2020. Aggrieved by the findings on Issue Nos. 1, 2, 3 &
5, one of the two returned candidates, namely Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu, has come up with the other
appeal namely Civil Appeal No.2159 of 2020.For the purpose of convenience, we refer to the
appellant in Civil Appeal No. 611 of 2020, as the appellant throughout and the appellant in the other
appeal as the returned candidate.
4. Before proceeding further, it must be recorded that there is no dispute either before us or before
the High court, about the fact that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote at 9.15 A.M. on 23.03.2018
and that the judgment of the criminal court was rendered at 2.30 p.m. on the very same day.
5. Before the High court, a preliminary objection was raised about the validity of the presumption on
the part of the election petitioner that Sri. Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour of Shri Dhiraj
Prasad Sahu. Unless Shri Amit Kumar Mahto had cast his vote in favour of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu,
the entire edifice on which the election petition was built could have crumbled. Therefore, the
Returning Officer, Mr. Binay Kumar Singh was examined as PW-1 and through him the original
ballot paper by which Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote was marked as Exhibit-9. On the basis of
the same, the High Court came to the conclusion that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour
of Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu, the Congress candidate. It was also clear from the evidence of PW-1 and
Exhibit-9 that Shri Amit Kumar Mahto did not cast his 2 nd, 3rd and 4th preference vote. Therefore,
the validity of the vote cast by Amit Kumar Mahto assumed significance, especially in view of the
margin of victory.
6. Since the factual position that Amit Kumar Mahto cast his vote in favour of Dhiraj Prasad Sahu
has now become unassailable, many of the issues framed by the High Court have now paled into
insignificance. There are only 2 issues which now survive for consideration and they are: -
(i) Whether the vote admittedly cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto in favour of Shri
Dhiraj Prasad Sahu at 9.15 A.M. on 23.03.2018 should be treated as an invalid vote
on account of the disqualification suffered by the voter under Article 191(1)(e) of the
Constitution of India read with Section 8(3) of the Representation of the People Act,
1951, by virtue of his conviction and sentence by the Sessions Court in a criminal
case, rendered at 2.30 P.M. on the very same date 23.03.2018;
and
(ii) Whether, in the event of the first issue being answered in the affirmative, the election petitioner
is entitled to be declared as duly elected automatically.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
4

7. It is needless to say that the second question as formulated above would arise only if the answer to
the first question is in the affirmative and not otherwise.
8. Before proceeding further, we may point out that two ancillary issues namely (i) the non-joinder
of the Election Commission of India as a party to the election petition; and (ii) the absence of a
specific prayer for recounting of votes, were also dealt with by the High Court. These issues may
have gained importance, but for the appeal filed by Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu against the findings on
Issue Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 5. Therefore, these ancillary issues need not deter us at this stage.
9. The primary contention of Shri Mukul Rohatgi and Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned senior
counsel appearing for the defeated candidate who is the appellant in the first civil appeal, is that
wherever a statute uses the word “date” with reference to an event, courts have always interpreted
the same to have happened at the intersection of the previous day and the present day, namely
00.01 a.m. This is firstly because it is at that time that the day begins and secondly because law
abhors fractions. Therefore, it is their contention that though the Sessions Court delivered its
judgment of conviction and sentence at 2.30 P.M. on 23.03.2018, the date of such conviction is
deemed in law to have commenced at about 00.01 A.M. when the date of March 22 lapsed and the
date of March 23 began. It is the further contention of the learned Senior Counsel that if the time at
which the judgment was delivered is irrelevant and the focus is actually on the date of conviction,
then the disqualification would also commence at 00.01 A.M. on 23.03.2018. As a corollary, the vote
cast at 9.15 A.M. on 23.03.2018 would be a vote by a disqualified member and thus invalid.
10. In order to test the veracity of the above contention, it is necessary first to take note of the
relevant provisions of the Constitution and the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
11. Article 191 of the Constitution speaks of the circumstances under which a person will be treated
as disqualified (i) either for being chosen as (ii) or for being , a member of the State Legislative
Assembly. The language of Article 191 makes it clear that it covers both a contest in an election and
the continuance in office after getting elected. It reads as follows: -
“191. Disqualifications for membership (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council
of a State
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government
of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than an office declared by the
Legislature of the State by law not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a
foreign State, or is under any acknowledgement of allegiance or adherence to a
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
5

foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament [Explanation.- For
the purposes of this clause] a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First
Schedule by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative
Council of a State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule]”
12. If a person, being a member of the Assembly, suffers a disqualification, his seat becomes vacant.
This situation is taken care of by Article 190 which reads as follows:
“190. Vacation of seats-
(1)…… (2)…….
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State-
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1 ) or clause
( 2 ) of Article 191; or
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or the
Chairman, as the case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the Speaker or the
Chairman, as the case may be, his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub clause (b), if from
information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such resignation is not
voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation]”
13. It is clear as daylight that the event which causes the disqualification under Article 191(1)(e) read
with Section 8(3) is a conviction of a person for any of the specified offences. The consequence of
such disqualification is that the seat becomes vacant. Obviously therefore, a Member of the
Legislative Assembly who has become disqualified and whose seat has become vacant is not entitled
to cast his vote for electing a representative from his State under Article 80(4) which provides that
the representatives of each State “shall be elected by the elected members”. His name is liable to be
deleted from the list of members of the State Legislative Assembly maintained under Section 152 of
the Representation of the People Act, 1951. He ceases to be an elector in relation to election by
assembly member and cannot cast his vote.
14. The Representation of the People Act, 1951 was enacted for the purpose of providing for the
conduct of elections of both houses of Parliament and to the House/Houses of State Legislatures,
the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those houses, the corrupt practices etc.,.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
6

Section 8 of the Act deals with disqualification on conviction for certain offences. For the purpose of
disqualification, the offences are classified in section 8 into 3 categories, namely
(i) offences falling under sub-section (1)
(ii) offences falling under sub-section (1) and
(iii) offences not falling either under sub-section (1) or under sub- section (2).
15. The disqualification results in the Member becoming liable to be removed from the list of voters
under Section 152 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, though the actual deletion may take
time. In any case, he ceases to be an elector vide Rule 2(d) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961
which provides that an elector in relation to an election by assembly members means any person
entitled to vote at that election.
16. We are concerned in this case with sub-section (3) of section 8, as Amit Kumar Mahto was
convicted for offences which do not fall either under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2).
Therefore, Sub- section (3) of section 8 alone is extracted as follows: -
“8. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences.-(1)……… (2) ………….
(3) A person convicted of any offence and sentenced to imprisonment for not less
than two years [other than any offence referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2)] shall be disqualified from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be
disqualified for a further period of six years since his release.]”
17. The disqualification under Section 8 of Act 43 of 1951 is relatable to Article 191(1)(e) of the
Constitution. Therefore, any interpretation to Section 8 should be in sync with the Constitutional
scheme.
18. As this Court had an occasion to point out in Saritha S. Nair vs. Hibi Eden1, Section 8(3) of the
Act deals both with the conditions of disqualification and with the period of disqualification. As
regards the period of disqualification, Section 8(3) is comprehensive in that it indicates both the
commencement of the period and its expiry. The date of conviction is prescribed to be the point of
commencement of disqualification and the date of completion of a period of six years after release,
is prescribed as the point of expiry of the period of disqualification.
SLP (C) No. 10678 of 2020 dated 08-12-2020
19. Once the period of disqualification starts running, the seat hitherto held by the person
disqualified becomes vacant by virtue of Article 190(3) of the Constitution. While speaking about the
seat of the disqualified person becoming vacant, Article 190(3) uses the expression “thereupon”. We
may have to keep this in mind while interpreting the words “the date of such conviction”.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
7

20. One fundamental principle that we may have to keep in mind while interpreting the phrase
appearing in Section 8(3) is that in cases of this nature, the Court is not dealing with a fundamental
right or a common law right. As pithily stated by this Court in Jyoti Basu vs. Devi Ghosal2, an
election dispute lies in a special jurisdiction and hence it has to be exercised without importing
concepts familiar to common law and equity, unless they are ingrained in the statute itself. We may
usefully extract the relevant portion of the decision in Jyoti Basu which reads as follows: -
“8. A right to elect, fundamental though it is to democracy, is, anomalously enough,
neither a fundamental right nor a Common Law Right. It is pure and simple, a
statutory right. So is the right to be elected. So is the right to dispute an election.
Outside of statute, there is no right to elect, no right to be elected and no right to
dispute an election. Statutory creations they are, and therefore, subject to statutory
limitation. An Election petition is not an action at Common Law, nor in equity. It is a
statutory proceeding to which neither the Common Law nor the principles of Equity
apply but only those rules which the statute makes and applies. It is a special
jurisdiction, and a special jurisdiction has always to be exercised in accordance with
the statutory creating it. Concepts familiar to Common Law and Equity must remain
strangers to Election Law unless statutorily embodied”.
(1982) 1 SCC 691
21. Placing heavy reliance upon the decision of this Court in Pashupati Nath Singh vs. Harihar
Prasad Singh3, it is contended that wherever the statute uses the words “ on the date”, it should be
taken to mean “on the whole of the day” and that law disregards as far as possible, fractions of the
day.
22. But in our considered view Pasupati Nath Singh hardly supports the contention of the Appellant.
In that case the election to the Bihar legislative Assembly from Dumro constituency was in issue. As
per the schedule, the filing of nominations was to take place from 13.01.1967 to 20.01.1967. The date
of scrutiny of nomination papers was fixed as 21.01.1967. The returning officer, upon scrutiny of
nominations on 21.01.1967, rejected the nomination paper of the Appellant before this Court, on the
ground that he had not made and subscribed the requisite oath or affirmation as enjoined by clause
(a) of Article 173, either before the scrutiny or even subsequently on the date of scrutiny. The
question that arose in that case was formulated in paragraph 4 as follows: -
“4. The short question which arises in this appeal is whether it is necessary for a
candidate to make and subscribe the requisite oath or affirmation as enjoined by
clause (a) of Art. 173 of the Constitution before the date fixed for scrutiny of
nomination paper. In other words, is a candidate entitled to make and subscribe the
requisite oath when objection is taken before the Returning Officer or must he have
made and subscribed the requisite oath or affirmation before the scrutiny of
nomination commenced?”
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
8

23. The answer to the above question turned on the interpretation to Section 36(2) of
the Act, clause (a) of which used the words “ on AIR 1968 SC 1064 the date fixed for
scrutiny”. The contention of the appellant before this court in Pashupati Nath Singh
was that he was entitled to take the oath or affirmation, before the Returning Officer,
immediately after an objection is made but before the objection was considered by
the Returning officer. Since Section 36(2)(a) uses the expression “on the date fixed
for scrutiny” it was contended by the appellant in Pashupati Nath Singh that the
whole of the day on which the scrutiny took place was available to him. However, this
contention was rejected by this Court in the following manner: -
“16. In this connection it must also be borne in mind that law disregards, as far as
possible, fractions of the day. It would lead to great confusion if it were held that a
candidate would be entitled to qualify for being chosen to fill a seat till the very end of
the date fixed for scrutiny of nominations. If the learned counsel for the petitioner is
right, the candidate could ask the Returning Officer to wait till 11.55 p.m. on the date
fixed for the scrutiny to enable him to take the oath”.
24. In other words, this Court interpreted the words “date” in Pashupati Nath Singh,
not necessarily to mean 00.01 A.M. to 24.00 P.M. This was despite the fact that in
common parlance a date would mean 24 hours in time. But the running of time got
arrested, the moment the nomination of the appellant in Pashupati Nath Singh was
taken up for scrutiny. Thus, the benefit of the whole day of 24 hours was not made
available by this court in Pashupati Nath Singh to the appellant therein and the act of
the Returning officer in drawing the curtains down at the happening of the event
namely scrutiny of nomination papers, was upheld by this court in Pashupati Nath
Singh.
25. In fact, Pashupati Nath Singh can be said to be a mirror image or the converse of
the case on hand. In the case on hand the period of commencement of an event is in
question, while in Pashupati Nath Singh the period of conclusion was in issue. If the
date on which scrutiny was taken up can be held to have ended at the time when the
event of scrutiny was taken up, we should, by the very same logic, hold that the date
of commencement of an event such as conviction and the consequent disqualification
should also begin only from the time when the event happened.
26. In fact, the argument of the appellant in this case is a double edged weapon. If the
event of conviction and sentencing that happened at 2.30 P.M. on 23.03.2018 can
relate back to 00.01 A.M., the event of voting by Shri. Amit Kumar Mahto which
happened at 9.15 A.M. can also relate back to 00.01 A.M. Once both of them are
deemed to relate back to the time of commencement of the date, the resulting
conundrum cannot be resolved. This why, the emphasis in Pashupati Nath Singh was
to provide an interpretation that will avoid confusion.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
9

27. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant relied upon the decision of this
Court in Prabhu Dayal Sesma vs. State of Rajasthan4in support of their contention
that a legal date commences after 12 o’ clock midnight and continue until the same
hour of the following night. But Prabhu Dayal Sesma arose in the context of Rule 11B
of the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services (1986) 4 SCC 59 Rules 1962 which
prescribed the minimum and maximum age for participation in the selection for
direct recruitment to Rajasthan Administrative Service. The appellant in that case
was born on 02.01.1956 and Rule 11B prescribed that an applicant for participation in
the selection, must not have attained the age of 28 years on the first day of January,
next following the last date fixed for receipt of application. Therefore, when a
notification was issued in the year 1983, the upper age limit was to be reckoned as on
January 1, 1984. Since the appellant was born on 02.01.1956 and attained the age of
28 years on 01.01.1984, his candidature was rejected. It was in such circumstances
that this Court took note of Section 4 of the Indian Majority Act 1875, which
stipulated the method of computation of the age of any person. In view of the fact
that Rule 11B used the words “must not have attained the age of 28 years”, this court
concluded that the appellant therein attained the said age at 12 o’clock midnight
when January 1 was born. We should point out here that if Prabu Dayal Sesma
concerned a case of retirement, he would be taken to have attained the age of
superannuation on January 1 by the very same logic, but at 2400 hours on January 1.
But Rule 11B mandated that the candidate “ must not have attained”. Therefore,
Prabhu Dayal Sesma also does not go to the rescue of the appellant.
28. Tarun Prasad Chatterjee vs. Dinanath Sharma5, relied upon by the learned senior counsel for
the appellant concerned the question of computation of the period of limitation for filing an (2000)
8 SCC 649 Election petition under section 81(1) of the R.P. Act 1951. Therefore, this Court referred
to Section 9 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 that laid down the manner in which statutes
prescribing the commencement and termination of time, can be worded by using expressions such
as “from” and “to”. But this decision is also of no assistance to the appellant for the simple reason
that Section 8(3) of the Act uses the word “ from” as well as the expression “ the date of conviction”
and Tarun Prasad Chatterjee concerned the interpretation to be given only to the word “from”.
29. In any case, Tarun Prasad Chatterjee need not have gone as far as the General Clauses Act, since
Section 12(1) the Limitation Act, 1963 itself provides for the exclusion of the date from which the
period of limitation is to be reckoned, while computing the period of limitation.
30. We must point out at this juncture that even in criminal law, there is a vast difference between
(i) the interpretation to be given to the expression “date”, while calculating the period of
imprisonment suffered by a person and (ii) the interpretation to be given to the very same
expression while computing the period limitation for filing an appeal/revision. Say for instance, a
person is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment and also taken into custody pursuant thereto,
on 23.03.2018, the whole of the day of March 23 will be included in the total period of incarceration.
But in contrast, the day of March 23 will be excluded for computing the period of limitation for filing
an appeal. Though one contrasts the other, both interpretations are intended to benefit the
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
10

individual.
31. Placing reliance upon the decision of the Constitution bench in B.R Kapur vs. State of T.N. &
Anr. 6 it was contended by the learned senior counsel for the appellant that the disqualification
under Article 191 of the Constitution and Section 8 of the R.P. Act is not a penal provision and that
therefore the question of beneficial construction would not arise, especially when the object of such
disqualification is to cleanse politics.
32. We have no doubt that disqualification is not a penal provision and that the object of
disqualification is to arrest criminalisation of politics.
33. But what triggered the disqualification in this case, under Section 8(3) was a conviction by a
criminal Court, for various offences under the Penal Code. Therefore, the phrase “ the date of
conviction” appearing in Section 8(3) should receive an interpretation with respect to the penal
provisions under which a person was convicted.
34. The rule that a person is deemed innocent until proved guilty is a long-standing principle of
constitutional law and cannot be taken to be displaced by the use of merely general words. In law
this is known as the principle of legality and clearly applies to the present case. In Pierson vs.
Secretary of State for the Home Department7, House of Lords held that unless there be clearest
(2001) 7 SCC 231 (1997) 3 All ER 577 provision to the contrary, Parliament is presumed not to
legislate contrary to rule of law which enforces ‘minimum standard of fairness both substantive and
procedural’.
35. In our view to hold that a Member of the Legislative Assembly stood disqualified even before he
was convicted would grossly violate his substantive right to be treated as innocent until proved
guilty. In Australia this principle has been described as an aspect of the rule of law “known both to
Parliament and the Courts, upon which statutory language will be interpreted”8.
36. In the present case, it would be significant to add that it is not necessary to make a declaration
incompatible in the use of the word “date” with the general rule of law since the word “date” is quite
capable of meaning the point of time when the event took place rather than the whole day.
37. The well-known presumption that a man is innocent until he is found guilty, cannot be subverted
because the words can accommodate both competing circumstances. While it is known that an
acquittal operates on nativity, no case has been cited before us for the proposition that a conviction
takes effect even a minute prior to itself. Moreover, the word “date” can be used to denote occasion,
time, year etc. It is also used for denoting the time up to the present when it is used in the phrase
“the two dates”. Significantly, the word “date” can also be used to denote a point of time etc. (See
Roget’s International Thesaurus third edition Note 114.4). K-Generation Pty. Ltd. vs. Liquor
Licensing Court, (2009) 83 ALJR 327 para 47.
38. To say that this presumption of innocence would evaporate from 00.01 A.M., though the
conviction was handed over at 14.30 P.M. would strike at the very root of the most fundamental
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
11

principle of Criminal Jurisprudence.
39. Inasmuch as a conviction for an offence is under a penal law, it cannot be deemed to have effect
from a point of time anterior to the conviction itself. As rightly pointed by Dr. A.M. Singhvi, this
court held in Union of India vs. M/S G.S Chatha Rice Mills9 that legal fiction cannot prevail over
facts where law does not intend it to so prevail. It was a case where a notification was issued by the
Government of India under section 8A of the Customs Tariff Act 1975, introducing a tariff on all
goods originating in or exported from Pakistan. The notification was uploaded on the e-gazette at
20:46:58 hours on 16.02.2019. The Government of India took a stand that the enhanced rate of duty
was applicable even to those who had already presented bills of entry for home consumption before
the enhanced rate was notified in the e-gazette. The importers successfully challenged the claim of
the customs authorities before the High court and the Union of India came up on appeal to this
Court. An extensive analysis was made in Section H of the decision in M/S G.S. Chatha Rice Mills,
on the interpretation of the words “day” and “date”. After taking note of several decisions, some of
which arose under the law of Limitation, some under the law of Insurance and some under the
Election law, this Court pointed out that these expressions were construed in varying contexts and
that a general position in law, divorced from (2020) SCC Online SC 770 subject, context and statute,
has not been laid down. As succinctly put by this Court, “Legislative silences create spaces for
creativity” and that “between interstices of legislative spaces and silences, the law is shaped by the
robust application of common sense”.
40. The decision in K Prabhakaran vs. P Jayarajan10 relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for
the appellant did not deal with the question that we are now confronted with. It was a case where (i)
the effect of several sentences of imprisonment, each for a period of less than 2 years ordered to run
consecutively and not concurrently, thereby totalling to more than the period prescribed under
section 8(3) of the Act and (ii) the effect of the decision of the Appellate Court rendered in a criminal
case after the election was over, were in question. It is in that context that the Constitution Bench
held in K Prabhakaran that Section 8 of the R.P Act has to be construed in harmony with the
provisions of Cr.P.C so as to give effect to the provisions contained in both.
41. Cases arising under the law of insurance, have no relevance to cases of disqualification. Even
under the law of insurance, different principles of interpretation have been carefully nurtured and
developed. For instance, New India Assurance Company Limited vs. Ram Dayal & Ors.11, this Court
was concerned with a case where a vehicle had insurance cover upto 31.08.1984, which was not
renewed. However, a fresh policy was taken on 28.09.1984. It was on (2005) 1 SCC 754 (1990) 2
SCC 680 the very same day that the vehicle got involved in an accident. The Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal upheld the repudiation of liability by the insurer, but the High Court held that the policy of
insurance obtained on the date of the accident became operative from the commencement of the
date of insurance, namely from the previous midnight. While upholding the view taken by the High
Court, by a short order, this Court referred to In Re F.B. Warren12, wherein it was held that a
judicial act will be referred to the first moment of the day on which it is done. However, in a
subsequent decision in National Insurance Company Limited vs. Jijubhai Nathuji Dabhi & Ors.13,
this Court explained the decision in Ram Dayal (supra) by stating that the same would hold good
only in the absence of any specific time mentioned in that behalf in the policy of insurance. In
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
12

Jijubhai Nathuji Dabhi (supra), the Court found that the contract clearly stipulated that it would be
operative from 4.00 p.m on 25.10.1983 and that therefore the insurance coverage was not available
in respect of an accident that happened before 4.00 p.m. on the same day. The decision in Jijubhai
Nathuji Dabhi (supra) was also followed in New India Assurance Company vs. Bhagwati Devi14.
42. It must be remembered that a policy of insurance lies in the realm of contract. Therefore, the
interpretation to be given to the terms of such contract would largely depend upon the intent of the
parties, with a certain degree of latitude in favour of a party whose (1938) 2 All ER 331 (1997) 1 SCC
66 (1998) 6 SCC 534 bargaining power is not equal to that of other contracting party. Hence, it is not
possible for us to adopt the interpretation given to the word “the date” appearing in a contract of
Insurance.
43. Accepting the appellant’s submission would require us to construe the statutory scheme as
intending something startling i.e. positing that the consequence precedes the cause. This would be
reducing this provision to absurdity and require Courts to hold that a consequence can precede its
cause, but according to the learned counsel this is the intended effect of the provision since it states
that a convicted person shall be disqualified from the date of his conviction. But we do not agree.
The disqualification arising under Section 8(3) of the Act, is the consequence of the conviction and
sentence imposed by the criminal Court. In other words, conviction is the cause and disqualification
is the consequence. A consequence can never precede the cause. If we accept the contention of the
appellant, the consequence will be deemed to have occurred even before the cause surfaced.
44. It is contended by the learned Senior Counsel for the Returned candidate, that the Constitution
also takes care of the contingency of disqualified persons sitting and voting despite suffering a
disqualification and that a court cannot travel beyond what is so prescribed. Article 193 which takes
care of this contingency reads as follows: -
“193. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation under Article
188 or when not qualified or when disqualified. - If a person sits or votes as a
member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State before he
has complied with the requirements of Article 188, or when he knows that he is not
qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited
from so doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of
the State, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a
penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the State.”
45. On the basis of Article 193, it is contended that when law prescribes certain consequences for an
act of commission, the Court cannot impose additional consequences. Reliance is placed in this
regard on the decision of this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Centre for Environment
Protection Research and Development & Ors.15,wherein it was held that when a Statute or the
Statutory Rules prescribes a penalty for any act or omission, no other penalty not contemplated in
the Statute or the Rules can be imposed.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
13

46. But we do not think that the aforesaid decision can be applied to cases where consequences
other than a penalty arise on account of an act or omission. While it is true that a penalty other than
the one prescribed by the Statute cannot be imposed for a particular act or omission, the said
principle has no place in so far as consequences other than penalty which flow automatically out of
such act or omission, are concerned.
47. Article 193 deals with the penalty to be imposed upon an erring member who sits or votes as a
member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council (i) either before he has complied with
the requirements of Article 188; (ii) or when he knows that he is (2020) SCC Online SC 687 not
qualified for membership; (iii) or when he knows that he is disqualified from being a Member; (iv)
or when he knows that he is prevented by any law from sitting or voting.
48. A disqualification for which penalty is prescribed under Article 193, also invites civil
consequences such as the denial of privileges that go with the membership, other than the penalty
stipulated in Article 193. Once a person is disqualified, he ceases to be a member and his right to
vote also ceases alongwith his membership. This is a natural consequence of a person ceasing to be a
member and this consequence is automatic and not dependent upon Article 193. Therefore, we
cannot stretch Article 193 to such an extent that even the natural consequences of disqualification of
a member will not get attracted because of the prescription of a penalty.
49. However, Article 193 and the interpretation given to the same by this Court may be of
significance for finding out whether an act or omission done by a person disqualified would also
perish and if so in what circumstances.
50. In Pashupati Nath Sukul vs. Nem Chandra Jain16, one of the questions that arose for
consideration was whether a person elected as a member of the Assembly but who has not made and
subscribed the prescribed oath or affirmation as required by Article 188 can validly propose a
person as a candidate at an election for filling a seat in the Rajya Sabha. This question arose under
peculiar circumstances. The elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State (1984) 2 SCC 404 of
Uttar Pradesh were held in May, 1980 and the notification containing the names of elected members
was issued on 09.06.1980 under Section 73 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The
elected members were notified that they could take oath as required by Article 188 at the Session of
the Assembly summoned to meet on 27.06.1980. But in the meantime, election for filling up a
vacancy in the Rajya Sabha was notified on 17.06.1980. Therefore, the proposal of the name of a
candidate for election to the Rajya Sabha, made by an elected member who was yet to take oath
under Article 188, was objected to. The objection was overruled and the nominated candidate won
the election. Therefore, the question as stated above arose, before this Court in an Election Petition.
51. Article 188 reads as follows: -
“188. Oath or affirmation by members. - Every member of the Legislative Assembly
or the Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe
before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.”
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
14

52. In view of the mandate of Article 188, it was argued before this Court in Pashupati Nath Sukul
(supra)that before taking his seat, an elected person is required to take an oath or affirmation and
that if he had failed to do so, he could not be counted as a member entitled to vote. Overruling the
said contention, this Court held as follows: -
“We are of the view that an elected member who has not taken oath but whose name
appears in the notification published under Section 73 of the Act can take part in all
non-legislative activities of an elected member. The right of voting at an election to
the Rajya Sabha can also be exercised by him. In this case since it is not disputed that
the name of the proposer had been included before the date on which he proposed
the name of the appellant as a candidate in the notification published under Section
73 of the Act and in the electoral roll maintained under Section 152 of the Act, it
should be held that there was no infirmity in the nomination. For the same reason
even the electoral roll which contained the names of elected members appearing in
the notification issued under Section 73 of the Act cannot be held to be illegal. That is
how even respondent No. 1 appears to have understood the true legal position as he
was also proposed as a candidate by an elector who had not yet made the oath or
affirmation.”
53. Therefore, it is clear that dehors the liability for penalty under Article 193, the act done by the
elected member is not liable to be invalidated, but only in certain circumstances. One of them may
be a case like the one on hand apart from cases falling foul of Article
188.But the position would have been different if Shri Amit Kumar Mahto had been convicted and
sentenced in the forenoon of 23.03.2018 and yet he voted in the election to the Rajya Sabha in the
afternoon with full knowledge.
54. The fallacy of the argument of the appellant that wherever the word “date” is used in a Statute, it
should be understood to relate back to 00:01 a.m. can be best understood if we apply the same to a
reverse situation. If in a hypothetical situation, the conviction and sentence had taken place in the
forenoon and Shri Amit Kumar Mahto had cast his vote in the afternoon, the defeated candidate
would not have argued that the voting should be deemed to have taken place at 00:01 a.m.
55. In any case the principle that the acts of the officers de facto performed within the scope of their
assumed official authority, in the interest of the public or third persons and not for their own
benefit, are generally regarded as valid and binding as if they were the acts of the officers de jure,
articulated in Pulin Behari Das & Ors. vs. King Emperor17, was invoked by this Court in Gokaraju
Rangaraju vs. State of Andhra Pradesh18 when a question arose as to the validity of the judgments
pronounced by an Additional Session Judge whose appointment was declared by the Court to be
invalid subsequently. This Court pointed out that the de facto doctrine is founded on good sense,
sound policy and practical expedience and that it is aimed at the prevention of public and private
mischief and the protection of public and private interest. As stated by this Court this doctrine
avoids endless confusion and needless chaos.
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
15

56. Again, in Pushpadevi M. Jatia vs. M.L. Wadhawan, Additional Secretary, Government of India &
ors. 19, this Court reiterated the de facto doctrine as one born of necessity and public policy to
prevent needless confusion and endless mischief. This Court held that “where an office exists under
the law, it matters not how the appointment of the incumbent is made, so far as validity of his acts
are concerned.” So long as he is clothed with the insignia of the office and exercises its powers and
functions, the acts performed by him were held by this Court to be valid.
57. Even in B.R. Kapur (supra), this Court invoked the de facto doctrine to declare as valid, all acts
performed by a Chief Minister (1912) 15 Cal.LJ 517 (1981) 3 SCC 132 (1987) 3 SCC 367 whose
appointment was held to be invalid from day one. Paragraph 57 of the said decision reads as follows:
“We are aware that the finding that the second respondent could not have been sworn
in as Chief Minister and cannot continue to function as such will have serious
consequences. Not only will it mean that the State has had no validly appointed Chief
Minister since 14th May, 2001, when the second respondent was sworn in, but also
that it has had no validly appointed Council of Ministers, for the Council of Ministers
was appointed on the recommendation of the second respondent. It would also mean
that all acts of the Government of Tamil Nadu since 14th May, 2001 would become
questionable. To alleviate these consequences and in the interest of the
administration of the State and its people, who would have acted on the premise that
the appointments were legal and valid, we propose to invoke the de facto doctrine
and declare that all acts, otherwise legal and valid, performed between 14th May,
2001 and today by the second respondent as Chief Minister, by the members of the
Council of Ministers and by the Government of the State shall not be adversely
affected by reason only of the order that we now propose to pass.”
58. Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the vote cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto at 9:15 a.m. on
23.03.2018 should be treated as invalid on account of the conviction and sentence passed by the
criminal Court at 2:30 p.m. on the same day. This conclusion can be drawn through another process
of reasoning also. Article 191 (1) of the Constitution deals with five different grounds of
disqualification. They are (i) holding an office of profit as specified in the First Schedule; (ii)
unsoundness of mind, which stands so declared by a competent Court; (iii) undischarged
insolvency; (iv) absence of citizenship of India or acquisition of citizenship of a foreign State etc.;
and (v) disqualification by or under any law made by Parliament.
59. The interpretation to be given to the expression “the date” appearing in Section 8(3) of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 will have a bearing upon the interpretation to be given to the
date of happening of any one of the above events of disqualification.
60. While it may be convenient for the appellant in this case to interpret the expression “the date”
appearing in Section 8(3) with reference to Article 191(1)(e), we may have to see whether the same
would fit into the scheme of Article 191(1) in entirety. It may not. If tested against each one of
Sub-clauses (a) to (d) of Clause (1) of Article 191 we would find that the interpretation offered by the
appellant would not survive. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. in Henry R Towne vs. Mark
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
16

Eisner20 while dealing with the construction of a word in the Constitution as well as a statute,
observed:-
“A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged; it is the skin of a living though
and may vary greatly in colour and content according to the circumstances and tie in
which it is used”
61. Therefore, on the first issue we hold that the vote cast by Shri Amit Kumar Mahto at 9:15 a.m. on
23.03.2018 was rightly treated as a valid vote. To hold otherwise would result either in an
expectation that the Returning Officer should have had foresight at 9:15 a.m. about the outcome of
the criminal case in the afternoon or in vesting with the Election Commission, a power to do an act
that will create endless confusion and needless chaos.
245 U.S. 418
62. In view of our above answer to the first issue, the second issue does not arise for consideration.
Therefore, the Civil Appeal No.611 of 2020 is dismissed. Civil Appeal No.2159 of 2020 is allowed,
setting aside the findings of the High Court on issue Nos. 2, 3 and 5 framed by the High Court. There
will be no order as to costs.
……………………………..CJI [S.A. BOBDE] ……………………………….J. [A.S. BOPANNA]
………………………………..J. [V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN] New Delhi December 18, 2020
Pradeep Kumar Sonthalia vs Dhiraj Prasad Sahu @ Dhiraj Sahu on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40857860/
17
