Rajasthan State Road Development And ... vs Piyush Kant
Sharma on 15 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5036, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
771
Author: M. R. Shah
Bench: M. R. Shah, R. Subhash Reddy, Ashok Bhushan
                                                    1
                                                             NON−REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3489 OF 2020
                                  [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 95 of 2020]
         Rajasthan State Road Development and
         Construction Corporation Ltd.                             .. Appellant
                                                 Versus
         Piyush Kant Sharma & Ors.                                 .. Respondents
                                                ORDER
M. R. Shah, J.
Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned interim Order dated 23.09.2019 passed by
the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1924 of 2019, the
original respondent − Rajasthan State Road Development and Construction Corporation Ltd. has
preferred the present appeal.
3. That the respondent No. 1 herein was appointed as Computer 16:30:20 IST Reason:
Operator on contractual basis. Respondent No. 1 – original petitioner filed the writ
petition before the High Court for grant of regular pay−scale and to regularize his
services on the ground that he is serving the appellant Corporation for the last three
years. It was the specific case on behalf of the appellant Corporation that respondent
Rajasthan State Road Development And ... vs Piyush Kant Sharma on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169326923/
1

No. 1 was never appointed by the appellant Corporation and there was no employer−
employee relationship between respondent No. 1 and the appellant Corporation. It
was the specific case on behalf of the appellant Corporation that the original writ
petitioner was hired through one M/s Sahara Supreme Security Service, Jaipur. It
was also the case on behalf of the appellant Corporation that even there was no
regular sanctioned post of Computer Operator existed in the appellant Corporation.
That, during the pendency of the aforesaid writ petition, another e−tender was issued
by the appellant Corporation for hiring the Computer Operators etc. and the contract
was awarded to one firm, namely, M/s Rakshak Security (P) Ltd. for providing
Computer Operators and other posts for a period of 12 months. That, thereafter, by
the impugned interim order dated 23.09.2019, the High Court has restrained the
appellant Corporation from appointing new set of contractual employees in place of
the original writ petitioner.
4. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned interim order passed by the High Court, the
original respondent No. 1 – Corporation has preferred the present appeal.
5. We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties at length.
5.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioner has submitted that
considering the fact that other similarly situated Computer Operators were continued and there was
a requirement of Computer Operator and, therefore, the High Court is justified in passing the
impugned interim order. 5.2 On the other hand, it is submitted by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellant Corporation that, as such, no reasons have been assigned by the High Court
while passing the impugned interim order. It is submitted that in fact the original writ petitioner
was a contractor’s employee and there was no employer−employee relationship between the original
writ petitioner and the appellant Corporation. It is submitted that even there is no regular
sanctioned post of Computer Operator in the appellant Corporation and, therefore, the appellant
Corporation gave the work order to the contractor for providing the services of the Computer
Operator etc., the High Court ought not to have passed such an interim order.
6. Having heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties, we are of the
opinion that the High Court has committed a grave error in passing such an interim order
restraining the appellant Corporation from appointing new set of contractual employees in place of
original writ petitioners. No reasons, whatsoever have been assigned by the High Court while
passing the impugned interim order. The High Court has failed to appreciate and consider the fact
that according to the appellant Corporation, there was no regular sanctioned post of Computer
Operator in the appellant Corporation and that there was no employer−employee relationship
between the original writ petitioner and the appellant Corporation and that the original writ
petitioner was a employee appointed by the contractor on contractual basis and worked with the
appellant Corporation on contractual basis. As the writ petition is pending before the High Court, we
refrain ourselves from making any further observations on merits. However, we are of the opinion
that in the facts and circumstances of the case narrated hereinabove, the High Court ought not to
have passed such an interim order. Under the circumstances, the impugned interim order passed by
Rajasthan State Road Development And ... vs Piyush Kant Sharma on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169326923/
2

the High Court requires to be quashed and set aside.
7. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal is allowed and the
impugned interim order passed by the High Court in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 1924 of 2019
restraining the appellant Corporation from appointing new set of contractual employees in place of
the original writ petitioners is hereby quashed and set aside. No costs.
……………………………J. (ASHOK BHUSHAN) ……………………………J. (R. SUBHASH REDDY)
……………………………J. (M. R. SHAH) New Delhi, October 15, 2020
Rajasthan State Road Development And ... vs Piyush Kant Sharma on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169326923/
3
