Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5561, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
808
Author: D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench: Indira Banerjee, Indu Malhotra, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
                                                                                     REP
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           Criminal Appeal No. 1648 of 2019
          Rajesh @ Sarkari & Anr.                                               ...Appel
                                                         Versus
          State of Haryana                                                      ...Respo
                                                   JUDGMENT
Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J 1 The appellants Rajesh alias Sarkari and Ajay Hooda have been
convicted, together with a co-accused 1 for an offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the
India Penal Code 2 and have been sentenced to imprisonment for life. 2 On 26 December 2006, a
ruqqa 3 was received at the Police Post, PGIMS from PGIMS, Rohtak about Sandeep Hooda, son of
Azad Singh Hooda, having Pehlad Singh alias Harpal IPC been brought dead there. ASI, Meha Singh
met Azad Singh, the complainant, at the emergency ward in PGIMS, Rohtak. Azad Singh made a
statement which was reduced into writing upon which a First Information Report4 being FIR No.
781 was registered under Section 154 of the Criminal Procedure Code 5 at Police Station Sadar,
Rohtak. The complainant stated that his elder son Sandeep was studying in the final year of the LLB
degree course in Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak 6. On 26 December 2006, Sandeep had
gone to the law department in the University to prepare for the exams. The complainant’s son-in-
law had come to their house and was in a hurry to leave after meeting Sandeep. They tried to contact
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
1

Sandeep on his cell phone but were unable to get through. The complainant and his younger son,
Sunil, then proceeded on their motor-cycle to the University. At about 2:30pm when they reached
the parking in proximity to the law department, they saw that 6 men standing under the tin sheds
started firing shots at Sandeep who was standing there. Sandeep was alleged to have fallen down
upon which the complainant and his son, Sunil, rushed towards the spot. The three young men fled
towards the Delhi road on a silver coloured Pulsar make motor-cycle. The complainant stated that
he had not noted the registration number of the motor-cycle but could identify the assailants, if they
were brought before him. The complainant alleged that blood was oozing out from the right foot,
abdomen, arm, left temple and thigh of Sandeep. The complainant also stated that Sandeep was
taken to PGIMS, Rohtak by Parveen, son of Zile Singh Hooda, and “another person” in a Santro car
belonging to written intimation FIR CrPC University Sandeep. However, he succumbed to the fire
arm injuries before reaching the hospital. The complainant, Azad Singh, stated that his son had
strained relations with some persons and those persons had killed him.
3 As a result of the investigation, initially, accused Rajesh alias Sarkari and Ajay Hooda were
apprehended and arraigned. Subsequently, accused Pehlad, was also arraigned to face trial. The
offence under Section 302 being triable exclusively by the Court of Sessions, the two appellants were
committed for trial to the Sessions Judge, Rohtak by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, pursuant to an
order dated 25 September 2007. Subsequently, on the basis of the supplementary charge-sheet
presented against accused Pehlad, he was also committed to the Court of Sessions Judge by the
JMFC on 31 March 2008. The trials against all the three accused were consolidated by an order
dated 12 April 2008. Charges were framed on 8 May 2008. All the accused pleaded that they were
not guilty. The prosecution examined 24 witnesses at the trial, as noted by the judgment of the
Sessions Court:
“9. The prosecution … examined as many as twenty four witnesses namely HC Karan
Singh as PW1, Ram Singh as PW2, Ajit Singh as PW3, Azad Singh as PW4, Sunil as
PW5, SI Wazir Singh as PW6, SI Jagram as PW7, HC Sat Narain as PW8, Constable
Sumit Kumar as PW9, SI Mahender Singh as PW10, ASI Dharambir as PW11,
Constable Rajiv Godara as PW12, HC Vijay Pal as PW13, Dr. Sushma jain as PW14,
retired Inspector Ram Mehar Singh as PW15, Ex. Head Constable Ranbir Singh as
PW16, Constable Jitender Kumar as PW17, Inspector/SHO Rajender Singh as PW18,
SI Ram Kishan as PW19, HC Jai Kishan as PW20, retired SI Maha Singh as PW21,
retired ASI Balwan Singh as PW22, SIBanarsi Dass as PW23 and EHC Ram Chander
as PW24. Learned Public Prosecutor for the State also tendered reports of FSL
Exhibits PD to PF in evidence. Thereafter, he closed the evidence of the prosecution.”
The reports of the Forensic Science Laboratory were marked as Exhibit PD-PF in
evidence. The accused were examined after the conclusion of the evidence of the
prosecution under Section 313 of the CrPC to explain the circumstances which
appeared against them in the evidence of the prosecution. They claimed innocence
and stated that they have been falsely implicated. One of the appellants, Rajesh alias
Sarkari, stated that the victim was implicated with him as a co-accused in another
case; that there was no dispute between them and that his photographs have been
published in the newspaper. The accused examined 5 witnesses in support of their
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
2

defence as noted by the judgment of the Sessions Court:
“11. …the accused have examined as many as five witnesses namely Jiley Singh as
DW1, Rajesh Jogpal, Record Keeper as DW2, Shamsher Singh as DW3, Parveen as
DW4 and Sikander as DW5, in their defence evidence.”
4 During the course of the trial, PW1, Head Constable Karan Singh, deposed that on 26 December
2006, he had joined the investigation of the case and together with ASI, Meha Singh and others, had
reached the scene of offence at the University. He recovered seven empty cartridges, one lead and
blood-stained earth which were packed into a parcel and sealed. Among the other recoveries, was a
liquor bottle with some quantity of liquor. The principal eye witnesses whose evidence was relied
upon by the prosecution were the complainant (PW4- Azad Singh) and his son (PW5-Sunil). PW4
stated that on 26 December 2006, he and PW5 had proceeded to the University where Sandeep had
gone to prepare for his examinations, as Sandeep could not be contacted on his telephone. At 2:30
pm when they reached near the cycle-stand of the law department, they saw the car belonging to
Sandeep parked there. Sandeep was standing under the cycle shed together with three persons.
When PW4 and PW5 were at a distance of about 100 feet from Sandeep, they saw him being fired at
with pistols or revolvers. PW4 identified the appellants in Court as the assailants at the scene of
offence. All the three accused are stated to have departed from the scene after executing the crime.
PW4, in the course of his evidence, stated that thereafter, he and PW5 took Sandeep to the Casualty
Department of PGIMS, Rohtak in the Santro car, where he was declared to be brought dead. The
police were stated to have reached the hospital and to have recorded his statement as Exhibit PB.
The deposition of PW5 was in similar terms. Significantly, both PW4 and PW5 stated that they had
removed Sandeep in his car to PGIMS, Rohtak which was at variance with the FIR which recorded
that Sandeep had been removed to the hospital by “Parveen, son of Zile Singh Hooda, and by
another person”. PW7- Jagram, Sub-Inspector, deposed that ASI Meha Singh had deposited two
sealed parcels, one containing blood-stained earth and the other containing 7 empty cartridges as
well as one lead with him, which he subsequently forwarded to the FSL, Madhuban on 8 January
2007. PW9- Sumit Kumar, Constable, prepared a scaled site-plan marked as Exhibit PJ. PW10-
Mahender Singh, SI, PW11- Dharambir, ASI, SIT Crime Branch, Rohini, PW12-Constable Rajeev
Godara, DRK, SIT Crime Branch, Rohini, deposed to the disclosure statements of the accused,
marked as Exhibits PQ and PR. The post mortem was conducted by PW14, Dr Sushma Jain, and was
marked as Exhibit PS and PT. The post mortem report indicates the presence of 13 injuries which
are described as follows:
“Injuries:
1. Entry wound: A wound of entry of size 1.5 cm, 0.5 cm with inverted margin was
present on right occipital region of scalp situated 1 cm posterior to right external
auditory meatus.
Blackening, charring ecchymosed was present around the wound.
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
3

Track- Bullet was piercing through all layers of scalp causing fracture of right occipital bone and
passing through and through the brain matter causing laceration of brain matter and then causing
communities fracture of petrous bone of left temporal bone and reaching just medial to left external
auditory meatus. Bullet recovered just medial to left external auditory meatus. Track going
downward medially and reaching on left side just medial to left external auditory meatus.
Injury No.2:
An entry wound 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm size was situated on the lateral border of lower part
of right arm 3 cm above the lateral epicondyle of right forearm margins inverted and
ecchymosed. Track going upward and medially piercing skin soft issue and muscles
going just above the right humerus bone reaching upto a point situated 3 cm above
the medial epicondyle of right forearm on the medial aspect of middle 1/3rd of right
arm. Bullet was situated just beneath the skin at the point where the track was
ending.
Injuries No.3 and 4.
3. An entry wound 1 cm x 0.5 cm was situated just above the left elbow joint on the
anterior aspect of left arm 4 cm lateral to the medial epncondyle (left) margins
inverted and ecchymosed.
Track:
Track was going medially and slightly downward only skin and entanous tissue deep.
4. Exit wound 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm size wound with everted margins was situated on the
medial aspect of lower 1/3rd of left arm and was 3.5 cm above the medial epicondyle
(left).
Injury No.5:
An entry wound of size 1 cm x 0.5 cm with inverted + and ecchymosed margins and
was situated on the medial aspect of middle 1/3rd of left forearm 13.5 cm below the
medial epicondyle (left). Blackening of skin was present around the wound. Track
was going downward and posterior-laterally piercing the skin, soft tissue and muscles
and reaching just beneath the skin on posterior lateral aspect of left forearm 12 cm
above the wrist joint and 2.5 cm medial and posterior to lateral border of left forearm
and bullet was recovered from the end point of track just beneath the skin.
Injury No.6 and 7.
6. An entry wound was situated 33 cm from lateral end of right patellaon lateral
aspect of upper 1/3rd of right thigh 1.5 cm x 0.5 cm size blackening, charring and
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
4

echymosis was present at the margins. Margins inverted.
Track:
Track was passing through skin and subcutaneous tissue and was going upward and
medially.
7. Exit wound: exit wound of size 2 cm x 0.5 cm with everted margins was situated 12
cm below the anterior aspect of upper 1 /3rd of right thigh and was 6.5 cm above the
entry wound.
Injury No.8 and 9:
8. An entry wound of size 1.5 cm x 0.5 cm was situated 10 cm inferio lateral to
anterior superior iliac spine (left) ecchymosis was present around the wound.
Track:
Track was going downward and medially piercing skin, subcutaneous tissues,
muscles and was causing fracture of femur (left) and reaching up to the exit wound.
9. Exit wound of size 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm was situated 32 cm above the medial side of left
patella. Margins were everted.
Injury No.10 & 11:
10. A wound of entry 1.5 cm x 0.5 cm size was situated 10.5 cm above the right
anterior superior iliac spine on the anterior abdominal wall. Margins were inverted.
Blackening and charring was present at margins.
Track:
Track was going backward towards the left side piercing skin subcutaneous tissues
abdominal muscles and was causing injury of small and large gut and reaching up the
exit wound on the back.
11. Exit wound of size 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm with everted margin was situated 9 cm above
the anterior superior iliac spine and
5 cm lateral to midline on left side of back.
Injury No.12 and 13:
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
5

12. An entry wound of size 2 cm x 1.5 cm with inverted margins was situated 6 cm
superior medial to right anterior superior iliac spine and was surrounded by 0.3 cm
to 0.5 cm size collar of abrasion all around the wound. Track was going upward and
towards left side and was piercing skin subcutaneous tissue muscles and causing
injury of small and large gut.
13. Exit wound: 0.5 cm x 0.5 cm size exit wound with everted margin was situated
just below the left costal 2 cm lateral to the line of nipple.
Heart right side contained blood. Stomach contained semi digested food. Rest of the organs were
normal.” Both PW10-Mahender Singh, SI and PW15-Ram Mehar Singh, retired Inspector, stated
that upon arrest, the appellants had refused to undergo a test identification parade. In pursuance of
the disclosure made by the accused Rajesh alias Sarkari, the Pulsar motor-cycle bearing registration
No. HR-10-H/2241 was recovered from his residence on 24 June 2007 in Sector IV Bhiwari,
Rajasthan. PW19-Ram Kishan, SI, in the course of his deposition, stated that a pistol had been
recovered from the rented house of accused Rajesh alias Sarkari at Palam Vihar, Gurgaon. PW19
also deposed to the recovery of a pistol from the rented house of accused Ajay Hooda at village
Carterpuri, Gurgaon. The recovery of the fire arm at the behest of the accused was sought to be
corroborated by the evidence of PW20-Head Constable Jai Kishan and PW21- Meha Singh. PW21-
Meha Singh, a former Sub-Inspector, had received the ruqqa on 26 December 2006 from PGIMS,
Rohtak. PW21 was a part of the police team which had reached the scene of offence and had lifted
seven empty cartridges and one lead from the spot.
5 The FSL report dated 29 November 2007, marked as Exhibit PD, stated that seven 7.62mm
mauser pistol fired cartridges and one 7.62mm mauser pistol fired bullet had been recovered from
the place of occurrence; and two 7.62mm deformed and mutilated fired bullets had been recovered
from the body of the deceased who had been fired at from a country made pistol. The pistol had
been received in an earlier FIR, being FIR No. 311 at Police Station, Civil Lines, Rohtak and was
stated to have been recovered from accused Rajesh alias Sarkari.
6 Five defence witnesses, during the course of their deposition, stated:
(i) DW1- Zile Singh denied that he had let-out his house to accused Ajay Hooda and
stated that the police had not visited the house in connection with any recovery. The
witness stated that he had seen the accused Ajay Hooda for the first time in Court;
(ii) DW2- Rajesh Jogpal, Record Keeper stated that accused Rajesh and the deceased
Sandeep had faced trial in a case arising out of the FIR No. 341 dated 23 June 2001
registered at Police Station, Civil Lines, Rohtak under Sections 454/380 of the IPC.
The case had been decided on 20 September 2008. Azad Singh, the
complainant/PW4 had stood surety for Sandeep in the said case;
(iii) DW3- Shamsher Singh, Executive Officer, Hari Bhumi Newspaper, Rohtak stated
that three news items regarding the incident were published in the newspaper on 23
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
6

February 2007, 13 April 2007 and 1 July 2007;
(iv) DW4- Parveen, s/o Zile Singh, deposed that on the date of the occurrence he,
together with Sikandar (DW5), was present along with Sandeep at the cycle-stand of
the law department at the University. Sandeep was consuming alcohol while sitting in
his car and after some time parked his car inside the shed and sat down on the
ground where he continued to drink. After sometime, 5-6 persons came there on two
motor-cycles and fired indiscriminately upon Sandeep. Sandeep fell down in an
injured condition and was removed by DW4 and DW5 to PGIMS, Rohtak where he
was declared dead by the doctors on duty. DW4 stated that the father and other
relatives of Sandeep reached the mortuary about 10 to 15 minutes after their arrival.
The police came there and recorded his statement. DW4 stated that the father of the
deceased (PW4) was not present at the scene of the occurrence and the accused
presented in the Court were not the assailants who had fired shots at Sandeep; and
(v) DW5- Sikandar, s/o Ashok Rathi, deposed along similar lines to DW4 and stated
that he and DW4 had taken Sandeep to PGIMS, Rohtak and had informed the father
and brother of Sandeep of the occurrence, who had accordingly reached PGIMS,
Rohtak.
The FSL Reports, Exhibit DY, DY/1 and DY/2 were also tendered in the course of the defence
evidence.
7 The Sessions Court, by its judgment dated 12 June 2012, concluded that there was a ring of truth
to the case of the prosecution and that the appellants were guilty of the offence of having committed
the murder of Sandeep. The appellants and the co-accused Pehlad were, following their conviction
under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC, sentenced to imprisonment for life. Aggrieved by
the judgment of the Sessions Court, all the three accused filed appeals in the High Court of Punjab
and Haryana. By a judgment dated 17 January 2019, the High Court dismissed the appeals.
8 Leading the submission on behalf of the appellants, Mr Rakesh Khanna, learned Senior Counsel
urged the following submissions:
A       PW4 and PW5 are not eye-witnesses
(i)     PW4 and PW5 were not present at the scene of the offence and their
depositions stating that they were eye-witnesses to the occurrence are untrustworthy;
(ii) The FIR which was lodged in close proximity to the occurrence of the crime on the statement of
PW4 clearly states that Sandeep was removed to the hospital by Parveen, son of Zile Singh Hooda,
and another person. In the depositions of PW4 and PW5, there is a marked improvement when they
stated that both of them have accompanied the deceased who was in an injured condition to PGIMS,
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
7

Rohtak;
(iii) Parveen, son of Zile Singh Hooda, deposed as DW4 and confirmed that it was he and Sikandar
(DW5) who had taken Sandeep to the hospital. Both DW4 and DW5 stated that PW4 and other
relatives of the deceased reached the mortuary after 10 to 15 minutes and neither PW4 nor PW5
were present at the scene of offence;
(iv) The information(ruqqa) sent by the Causalty Medical Officer on 26 December 2006 records that
the deceased Sandeep was brought to PGIMS, Rohtak by “Sandeep Lehri, son of Zile Singh Hooda
resident of Kailash Colony, Rohtak”. The name ‘Sandeep’ Lehri is an inadvertent error in place of
‘Parveen’ who is also described as the son of Zile Singh Hooda, resident of Kailash Colony, Rohtak;
(v) The post-mortem report and the statement of PW14 indicates that injury nos. 1, 5, 6, 10 and 11
showed blackening, charring and ecchymosis at the margins. PW4 in his deposition has stated that
the accused fired at Sandeep from a distance of 4-5 feet. However, as explained in the decision of
this Court in State of Rajasthan v. Daud Khan 7, blackening of injuries can only be observed if the
pistol is fired from a very close range, i.e., 2 feet or less. This indicates that PW4 and PW5 were not
present at the site; and
(vi) On the above grounds, it has been submitted that neither PW4 nor PW5 are eye-witnesses to the
occurrence.
B         The Forensic Science Laboratory8 report
(i)       There are three FSL reports on the record – two relate to FIR No. 311 of
2006 and one pertaining to the present case which arises out of FIR No. 781 of 2006;
(2016) 2 SCC 607 FSL
(ii) The first FSL report dated 12 March 2007 pertains to FIR No. 311 where three parcels containing
the clothes of injured persons, one 7.65mm fired bullet taken from the body of an injured person by
the name of Kuldeep, four 7.65 mm fired pistol cartridge cases and one 7.65mm live pistol cartridge
were collected from the place of occurrence. After the FSL report was prepared, the samples were
resealed with the seal of L.S.Y (BALL) FSL (H);
(iii) The second FSL report is dated 25 September 2007 in FIR No. 311. In the description of parcels
and the condition of seals, it has been stated that four parcels were received: two with the seal of
R.K. and two with the seal of L.S.Y SOS (Ball) FSL (H). The first parcel contained a pistol chambered
for 7.65mm cartridges along with the magazine, one 7.65mm fired cartridge case and one 7.65mm
live cartridge stated to have been recovered from the accused Rajesh. The pistol was marked W/1
and the cartridge case was marked C/5. The second parcel contained one pistol chambered for
7.62mm/0.30” cartridges along with magazine and one 7.62mm misfired cartridge stated to have
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
8

been recovered from accused Ajay. The pistol was marked W/2 and the misfired cartridge as MC/1.
The third parcel with the seal of L.S.Y SOS (Ball) FSL (H) contained one 7.65 mm fired bullet
already marked as BC/1 in the earlier first FSL report dated 12 March 2007. The fourth parcel had a
number and seal impression L.S.Y SOS (Ball) FLS (H) and contained four 7.65mm fired cartridge
cases and one 7.65mm live cartridge (the fired cartridge cases were already marked as C/1 to C/4 in
the earlier first FSL report dated 12 March 2007);
(iv) In the laboratory examination, it was stated that both the pistols were test fired and that their
firing mechanisms were found in working order. The class as well as individual characteristic marks
present on the 7.65mm fired cartridge cases C/1 to C/5, 7.62mm / 0.30” misfired cartridge marked
MC/1, 7.65mm fired bullet BC/1 and those on the test fired cartridge cases and bullets fired from
pistols marked W/1 and W/2 were examined. In the result, it was stated that pistols W/1 and W/2
were in working order. The 7.65mm cartridge case marked C/5 was found fired from pistol W/2.
However, the 7.65mm fired cases C/1 to C/4 and 7.65mm fired bullet marked BC/1 were not fired
from the pistol marked as W/1. In so far as the 7.62mm misfired cartridge MC/1 is concerned, it was
found to be misfired from pistol W/2. All the exhibits were resealed along with their original
wrappers with the seal of L.S.Y SSO (Ball) FSL (H). One 7.65mm cartridge received in parcel No. 4
has been used in test firing in the laboratory; and
(v) The third FSL report dated 29 November 2007 pertains to FIR No. 781 lodged in the present
case. In the description of articles, five parcels were stated to have been received on 8 January 2007.
According to the submission, the receipt or description of parcels sealed by the ballistic expert is not
mentioned, as per his report dated 25 September 2007. The first parcel inter alia contained blood
stained earth, lifted from the place of occurrence and sent for serological examination. The second
parcel is stated to contain seven 7.62mm mauser pistol fired cartridge cases and one 7.62mm pistol
fired bullet recovered from the place of occurrence which were marked as C/1 to C/7 and BC/1
respectively. The third and fourth parcels contained blood stained clothes. The fifth parcel contain
two 7.62mm deformed and mutilated fired bullets and two lead pieces stated to have been recovered
from the body of the deceased, marked as BC/2, BC/3, BC/4 and BC/5. In the laboratory
examination, it has been stated that the individual characteristic marks present on the 7.62mm
mauser pistol fired cartridge cases marked as C/1 to C/7 and 7.62mm mauser pistol fired bullets
marks BC/1 to BC/3 and those on test cartridges and test bullets fired from country made pistol W/2
(chambered for 7.62mm cartridges), received in the second FSL report in connection with the FIR
No. 311 were examined. The lead pieces marked BC/4 and BC/5 in parcel 5 were also examined. The
lead piece BC/4 was found to be a 0.455” revolver bullet. No regular rifling marks were observed. 9
On the basis of the above narration, it has been submitted that:
(i) The parcel containing the pistol marked as W/2 and the test fired bullet, sealed by
the ballistic examiner as per the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007,
admittedly had not been received and described in the description of articles
contained in the third FSL report dated 29 November 2007, arising from FIR No. 781
(present case);
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
9

(ii) There is no material on record to establish that it was brought to the notice of the
Assistant Director, RK Koshal, who examined the articles contained in the parcels,
about any connection of the parcels received for examination, with the parcels
examined in the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007;
(iii) The description of the pistol in the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007
indicates that it is chambered for 7.62mm/0.30” cartridges. However, the description
of the cartridges received in the third FSL report in this case is 7.62mm mauser pistol
fired cartridge cases. The recovery memo in regard to the place of occurrence refers
to seven empties and one cartridge bearing the description of S and B 7.62 X 25,
whereas in the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007 the description is
7.62mm / 0.30” cartridge; and
(iv) Though the author of the third FSL report dated 29 November 2007 states that
the cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/7 and the bullet marked BC/1 to BC/3 had been
fired from the country made pistol marked W/2, the said pistol was never produced
before the author of this report nor was any information placed before him about the
interconnection of pistol W/2 and the cartridge cases to C/1 to C/7 or the fired bullets
BC/1 to BC/3. The IO of the present case, PW21, has, in the course of his
cross-examination, admitted that on the empty shells Exhibits P4 to P10, there was
an inscription 7.62K 25, which does not tally with the description recorded in the
second FSL report dated 25 September 2007 or the third FSL report dated 29
November 2007.
10 On the basis of the above discrepancies, it has been urged on behalf of the appellants that the
prosecution has failed to establish that PW4 and PW5 were eye-witnesses at the scene of occurrence.
Moreover, the prosecution has failed to establish the correctness of the FSL report. The ballistics
examiners have not been examined in the course of the evidence tendered by the prosecution. The
discrepancies in the FSL reports could have been explained in the course of the examination by the
FSL examiners. Their non-examination cuts at the root of the case of the prosecution and would
entitle the appellants to an acquittal.
11 On the other hand, Mr Deepak Thukral, learned Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the
Haryana, has opposed the submissions of the appellants and submitted:
(i) As regards the presence of PW4 and PW5, the Sessions Court noted that the
deceased had sustained 13 injuries as a result of the fire arm attack.
PW4 and PW5 who had come to the scene of the offence on their motor- cycle could not possibly
have removed the deceased on a two-wheeler to the hospital and hence it was DW4- Parveen who
took him in the car belonging to the deceased;
(ii) Corroboration of the presence of PW4 and PW5 at the scene of offence is established by the fact
that the track suit of the deceased was handed over by PW5 to the police. One of the articles that has
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
10

been examined in the course of the third FSL report is the track suit of the deceased. This would
indicate the presence of PW4 and PW5;
(iii) PW4 and PW5 were cross-examined at length on their presence at the scene of occurrence.
Their testimony is corroborated by the medical evidence which suggests that the death occurred due
to extensive fire arm injuries;
(iv) As regards the FSL reports, the test cartridges were fired from pistol W/2 and the test firing was
carried out in the lab. The test cartridges and test bullets were again compared. However, the third
FSL report inadvertently mentions that pistol W/2 was recovered from Rajesh though it was actually
recovered from Ajay;
(v) Though the third FSL report does not refer to pistol W/1 which was recovered from Rajesh, his
conviction can be sustained under the provisions of Section 34 of the IPC having regard to the
extensive nature of the fire arm injuries and the recovery of fire arms;
(vi) Both the appellants refused the test identification parade and an adverse inference ought to be
drawn. The explanation of the appellants that they did so because their photographs were published
in the newspapers is belied by the fact that out of the three newspaper publications, only one had
mentioned their names and none of them had published their photographs;
(vii) The FSL reports were filed by the defence after the statements of the appellants under Section
313 of the CrPC were recorded, and the failure to examine the ballistics examiner must be construed
from that perspective;
(viii) The eye-witness account of PW4 and PW5 finds corroboration in the medical evidence and the
FSL report; and
(ix) Though the appellants have sought to discredit the prosecution version by adverting to the
blackening of the injury, blackening is not always due to the close range of the firing, as noticed in
the judgment of this Court in Mohan Singh vs. State of M.P.9 12 The rival submissions will now be
considered. Broadly speaking the submissions in the present case traverse three areas:
(i) Whether PWs 4 and 5 were eye-witnesses at the scene of occurrence on 26
December 2006;
(ii) The weight to be ascribed to the third FSL report; and
(iii) The refusal of the accused appellants to undergo a test identification parade.
13 Each of the above aspects needs to be analyzed.
The presence of PW4-Azad Singh and PW5-Sunil Singh 14 PW4 is the complainant, the father of the
deceased. PW5-Sunil is the brother of the deceased. The FIR records that the information was
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
11

received at the Police Station Sadar, Rohtak at 5:20 pm on 26 December 2006. General diary
reference entry 22/2012 is at 6:20 pm. The FIR which was registered on the statement of PW4 states
that the son-in-law of the complainant had come to visit and wanted to meet the deceased Sandeep.
Since Sandeep was not reachable at his cell phone, PW4 and PW5 are stated to have gone to the
University and when they arrived near the law department they noticed “six boys under the tin
sheds”, who started firing at Sandeep. The incident is stated to have taken place (1999) 2 SCC 428 at
2:30 pm and following the gun shots which were fired at him, Sandeep is stated to have fallen on the
ground. According to the FIR, the accused escaped from the spot. The complainant stated that he
and his son Sunil could identify the three young boys if they were brought before them. The FIR
contains a specific statement that Sandeep was removed to PGIMS, Rohtak by Parveen, son of Zile
Singh Hooda, a resident of Kailash Colony, Rohtak and by one other boy in a Santro car which was
standing at the spot.
15 The principal line of attack to doubt whether PW4 and PW5 are eye- witnesses to the occurrence
is based on the improvements made in the course of their deposition. In the course of his
examination-in-chief, PW4 stated that when he and PW5 were at a distance of 100 feet from
Sandeep, they saw “three boys firing shots”. He purported to identify the three accused who were
present in the Court as the persons who had fired on his son “with weapons which were like pistols
and revolvers”. PW4 then stated that “we [meaning thereby PW4 and PW5] took our son Sandeep in
Santro car to the Casualty Department of PGIMS, Rohtak as my son was having bullet injuries on his
chest, thighs, arm and temple”. PW4 states that Sandeep was declared as brought dead by the
doctors and then the police reached the hospital and recorded his statement, marked as Exhibit PB.
During the course of the cross-examination, PW4 denied that at the time of occurrence, Sikandar
Rathi (DW5) and ‘Lehri’ (potentially referring to DW4) were standing with his son. In the course of
the cross-examination, it was suggested to PW4 that Sandeep was not removed by him and PW5 to
the hospital and that as a matter of fact, it was Sikandar Rathi (DW5) and ‘Lehri’(DW4) who had
taken him to the hospital. PW4 denied this suggestion as well as the suggestion that neither he nor
PW5 were present at the scene of occurrence. PW4 also stated that the clothes worn by him and by
PW5 were smeared with blood but they had not been collected by the police. According to PW4, he
and PW5 reached PGIMS, Rohtak at about 2.45pm and the police had arrived at 4:00pm.
16 In the course of his examination-in-chief, PW5 similarly stated that Sandeep had been removed
to the hospital by him and his father PW4 and that he gave the shirt of the track suit of Sandeep to
the police, which was removed by him while they were shifting him to hospital. PW5, in the course
of his cross- examination stated that when he and PW4 took Sandeep to hospital their clothes were
smeared with blood but that neither he nor PW4 handed over their clothes to the police.
17 PW4, in the course of his cross-examination, stated that he, PW5 and “one unknown person” had
lifted Sandeep from the spot to take him to PGIMS, Rohtak. On the other hand, PW5, in the course
of his deposition, does not mention the presence of any third person who took Sandeep with them to
the hospital. While PW4 states that the police reached the hospital at 4:00pm, PW5, on the other
hand, is unaware of when the police had reached the hospital. Now, in this background, it is
important to notice that there are clear improvements made by PW4 and PW5, which have a bearing
on whether they were eye- witnesses to the alleged occurrence. Both PW4 and PW5 have made
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
12

substantial improvements in the course of their examination in evidence. Both the witnesses
attempted to bolster the case of the prosecution with regard to their presence at the scene of crime
and of being eye-witnesses to the occurrence by stating that they had removed Sandeep to the
hospital after he had been gunned down. The absence of any reference to their taking Sandeep to the
hospital in the FIR has a bearing on whether they were eye-witnesses to the occurrence. The
incident took place at the University where the deceased was a student and, according to PW4, was
preparing for his supplementary law exams. The theory that PW4 and PW5 were present at the
scene of offence and had removed the deceased to the hospital must be tested with reference to two
significant circumstances which have emerged from the record. First, the record of the trial before
the Sessions Court, which has been produced before this Court, indicates that the deceased was
brought dead to PGIMS, Rohtak at 3:00pm. The ruqqa was sent to the police at 3:35pm. The ruqqa
indicates that the deceased was brought by “Sandeep Lehri son of Shri Zile Singh Hooda, Resident of
Kailash Colony, Rohtak”. The reference to ‘Sandeep Lehri’ is a significant circumstance which
indicates that neither PW4 nor PW5 were present at the scene of offence which is why, after the
incident, it was not PW4 or PW5, but a third person who had transported the deceased Sandeep to
the hospital. The Sessions Court while appreciating this aspect, explained away the argument of the
defence that neither PW4 nor PW5 were present at the scene of offence, by holding that perhaps
both of them were present, but had suffered a shock of having witnessed the murder of Sandeep
which is why the ruqqa was signed by DW4. In arriving at this conclusion, the Sessions Court had
supplied an explanation which does not comport with the case of the prosecution. Second, the case
of the prosecution, it must be noted, was not that Sandeep was taken to the hospital by two other
persons who eventually were produced by the defence in evidence as DW4 (Parveen) and DW5
(Sikandar Rathi). The case of the prosecution was that as a matter of fact PW4 and PW5 had taken
Sandeep to PGIMS, Rohtak. As we have noted earlier, PW4 stated that he, PW5 and an unknown
person had done so, while PW5 stated it was only PW4 and him who had removed the injured to
hospital. The defence produced, among other witnesses, DW4 and DW5. In the course of his
examination, DW4 stated that he and DW5 had taken Sandeep to the hospital and that PW4 and
PW5 had arrived at the hospital after they reached there. DW4 stated that he and DW5 removed
Sandeep to PGIMS, Rohtak and it was about 10 to 15 minutes after their arrival at the hospital that
PW4 and other relatives reached the hospital. Though the ruqqa mentioned the name of the person
who brought the deceased to PGIMS as Sandeep Lehri, son of Zile Singh Hooda, resident of Kailash
Colony Rohtak, the name of the person is evidently incorrect since it is Parveen (DW4) who is the
son of Zile Singh Hooda and resident of Kailash Colony, Rohtak. DW4 and DW5 stated that it was
them who had taken Sandeep to the hospital and neither PW4 nor PW5 were present at the scene of
the occurrence.
18 Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent sought to submit that the presence of
PW5 at the scene of occurrence is corroborated by the fact that the shirt of the track suit of the
deceased was handed over by PW5 to the police and it had been examined in the third FSL report.
The handing over of the track suit of the deceased Sandeep to the police at the hospital by PW5
would indicate his presence at PGIMS, Rohtak but does not establish that PW4 or PW5 were
eye-witnesses to the incident which took place near the law department at the University. As a
matter of fact, DW5 in the course of his examination stated that he and DW4 had informed the
father and brother of the deceased and that the police had also recorded their statements. The
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
13

presence of DW4 is a reasonable inference which emerges from the ruqqa. For reasons best known
to the prosecution, neither DW4 (Parveen) nor DW5 (Sikandar) were produced as witnesses and the
failure of the prosecution to lead the evidence of DW4 (Parveen) is a matter which has a bearing on
the issue as to whether PW4 and PW5 were genuine eye-witnesses at the scene of occurrence. The
material and evidence which has emerged on the record is sufficient to cast doubt on their presence
at the scene of occurrence. Additionally, the Sessions Court did not deal with the depositions of
DW4 and DW5, save and except for stating that their deposition on the age of the assailants being
around 30-35 years, did not inspire confidence. The discussion in the judgment of the Sessions
Court on this crucial aspect lacks proper evaluation of the evidence at hand. 19 In this background, it
is necessary to notice that according to the FIR which was lodged on a complaint by PW4, there was
a previous enmity/quarrel between the deceased and the accused. PW4, in the course of his
cross-examination stated that the deceased was facing trial in 2-3 cases, in some of which he had
been acquitted. However, PW4 expressed ignorance about whether the deceased was a co-accused
with accused Rajesh alias Sarkari. Moreover, he stated that he did not know the accused Rajesh on
account of his being co- accused with Sandeep in a case bearing FIR No. 341 dated 23 June 2001
under Sections 454/380 of the IPC at Police Station, Civil Lines, Rohtak or whether they were
arrested in the case. He denied the suggestion that Sandeep and Rajesh appeared together in the
case and that PW4 had visited the court on each and every date of hearing of that case, in spite of
PW4 being a surety in that case for the deceased Sandeep. Contrary to what was stated in the FIR,
PW4 in course of his cross examination stated that the deceased had no previous enmity with any of
the accused before the occurrence. PW5, in the course of his cross- examination, was confronted
with the fact that the deceased had been facing trial in criminal cases and specifically admitted that
the deceased was facing criminal trial in 2-3 matters, where he was acquitted on account of a
compromise. PW5 also stated that he was unaware as to whether Sandeep was a co-accused together
with Rajesh in a case bearing FIR No. 341 under Sections 454 and 380 of the IPC. However, he
stated:
“It is correct to suggest that I and my father used to come to the court when my
brother Sandeep alias Bhander and present accused Rajesh alias Sarkari were being
produced in the court on various dates of hearings. I do not know as to who had the
engaged the counsel for my brother in that case and who stood surety for him”.
20 The fact that the deceased was facing trial in other cases was also stated in the course of DW4’s
examination-in-chief. This aspect of the case would be of particular relevance to determine whether
an adverse inference should be drawn, as the State has suggested, to the refusal of the appellants to
submit themselves to a test identification parade. This aspect will be dealt with in a subsequent part
of the judgment.
FSL Reports 21 Now while considering this aspect of the record, it must be noticed that the weapons
which are alleged to have been used by the two appellants in the course of the crime were, according
the prosecution, seized in connection with another FIR No. 311 under Section 307 read with Section
34 of the IPC and Sections 25, 54, 59 of the Arms Act, registered on 19 May 2006 at Police Station
Civil Lines, Rohtak, against both the appellants. There are two FSL reports pertaining to FIR No.
311:
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
14

1) The first FSL report dated 12 March 2007 pertains to three parcels containing:
(i) clothes of the one injured Kuldeep in that case; and
(ii) One 7.65mm fired bullet stated to have been taken from the body of the injured
marked BC/1; and four 7.65mm fired pistol cartridges cases and one 7.65 live pistol
cartridges collected at the place of occurrence (marked C/1 to C/4 and L/1).
The first FSL report is to the following effect:
“ LABORATORY EXAMINATION The class as well as individual characteristic marks present on
7.65mm fired cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/4 were examined and inter-compared under stereo
and comparison microscope. 7.65mm fired bullet marked BC/1 was also examined under stereo
microscope.
The holes on the clothes contained in parcel No. 1 were examined for firearm discharge residues.
Lead was detected from the margins of the holes on T-shirts and paints. The margins of the holes on
the T-shirt and paints contained in parcel No. 1 were also examined under stereo microscope. Based
on the examination carried out in the laboratory, the result of analysis is as under:
RESULT
1. 7.65mm fired cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/4 have been fired from the one and
same fire arm.
2. 7.65mm fired bullet marked BC/1 has been fired from a Country made firearm.
3. Holes on the T-shirt and the paints contained in parcel No. 1 have been caused by
bullet projectiles.
4. Report in original from Serology division is enclosed herewith.
Note: After examination exhibits examined in the Ballistics division were resealed along with the
original wrappers with the seals of L.S.Y. (BALL) FSL (H).” The FSL report has been prepared by LS
Yadav, Senior Scientific Officer (Ballistics) at the Forensic Science Laboratory, Madhuban, Karnal.
2) The second FSL report dated 25 September 2007 (described as a part report in connection with
FIR No. 311) deals with 4 parcels containing:
(i) one pistol chambered for 7.65mm cartridges along with a magazine bearing No.
7111, one 7.65mm fired cartridge case and one 7.65mm live cartridge stated to have
been recovered from accused Rajesh. The pistol was marked W/1 and the cartridge
case C/5;
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
15

(ii) one pistol chambered for 7.62mm/0.30” cartridges and magazine and one
7.62mm misfired cartridge stated to have been recovered from accused Ajay. The
pistol was marked W/2 and the misfired cartridge MC/1;
(iii) one 7.65mm fired bullet (already market BC/1 in FSL No. F-06/2193) referred to
in the first FSL report; and
(iv) four 7.65mm fired cartridge cases and one 7.65mm live cartridge (the fired
cartridges marked C/1 to C/4 in the first FSL report).
The second FSL report contains the following:
“LABORATORY EXAMINATION Products of combustion of smokeless powder were
detected from the barrels of pistols marked W/1 (chambered for 7.65mm cartridges),
w/2 (Chambered for 7.62mm/.30."
cartridges). Test firings were done in the laboratory from pistols marked W/1 & W/2. Their firing
mechanism were found in working order.
The class as well as individual characteristic marks present on 7.65mm fired cartridge cases C/1 to
C/5, 7.62mm/.30"
misfired cartridge marked MC/1, 7.65mm fired bullet BC/1 and those on test fired
cartridge cases and bullets fired from pistols marked W/1 (chambered for 7.65mm
cartridges), W/2 (chambered for 7.62mm/30" cartridges) were examined and
compared with their respective caliber/bore under stereo and comparison
microscope.
Based on the examination carried out in the laboratory, the result of analysis Is as
under.
RESULT
1. Pistols marked W/1 (chambered for ·7.65mm cartridges), W/2 (chambered for
7.62mm/.30"
cartridges) are firearms as defined in the Arms Act 54 of 1959. Their firing mechanism were found in
working order. Pistols W/1 & W/2 had been fired through.
2. 7.65mm fired cartridge case marked C/5 has been fired from pistol marked W/1 (chambered for
7.65mm cartridges) and not from any other firearm even of the same make and bore/calibre,
because every firearm has got its own individual characteristic marks.
3. 7.62mm misfired cartridge marked MC/1 has missed-
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
16

fire from pistol marked W/2 (chambered for 7.62mm/.30" cartridges)
4. 7.65mm fired cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/4 and 7.65mm fired bullet BC/1 have not been
fired from pistol marked W/1 (chambered for 7.65mm cartridges) Note :- i) After examination,
exhibits were resealed alongwith their original wrappers with the seal of L.S.Y, SSO (BALL) FSL.(H).
ii) One number of 7.65mm live cartridge received in parcel No. IV has been used in test firings in the
laboratory.” The second FSL report has also been prepared again by LS Yadav, Senior Scientific
Officer (Ballistic) at the FSL, Madhuban Karnal.
3) The third FSL report dated 29 November 2007 in the present case is marked as Exhibit PD. The
third FSL report is with reference to a forwarding memo of the Deputy Superintendent of Police
(HO Rohtak) dated 31 December 2006 regarding five sealed parcels in connection with FIR No. 781
dated 26 December 2006 under Section 302 read with 34 of the IPC and Sections 25, 54 and 55 of
the Arms Act at Police Station Civil Lines, Rohtak. The forwarding memo is stated to have been
received by the FSL on 8 January 2007. The FSL report contains a description of five articles in the
parcels as follows:
(i) blood stained earth lifted from the place of occurrence;
(ii) seven 7.62mm mauser pistol fired cartridge cases and one 7.62mm mauser pistol
fired bullet stated to have been recovered from the place of occurrence. The cartridge
cases marked as C/1 to C/3 and the bullet BC/1;
(iii) blood-stained cloth recovered from the car by the witness and blood-
stained clothes of the deceased; and
(iv) two 7.62mm deformed and mutilated fired bullets, two lead pieces stated to have been recovered
from the body of the deceased (the bullets are BC/2, BC/3, and the lead pieces are BC/4 and BC/5).
The third FSL report contains the following:
“LABORATORY EXAMINATION The class as well as the individual characteristic
marks present on 7.62mm mauser pistol fired cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/7 and
7.62mm mauser pistol fired bullets marked BC/1 to BC/3 and those on test carriages
and test bullets fired from country made pistol marked W/2 (chambered for 7.62mm
cartridges) [Received in case FSL No. 07/F-3937 FIR No. 311 dated 19.05.06 U/S
307/34 IPC & 25/54/59 A.Act P.S Civil Line Rohtak recovered on 25.06.07) were
examined and compared under stereo and comparison microscope.
The clothes contained in parcel No. III & IV were examined for the presence of
gunshot discharge residues. Copper and lead in traces were detected from the
margins of the holes on the clothes contained in parcels No III & IV. The holes on the
clothes were also examined under stereo microscope. The lead pieces marked BC/4 &
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
17

BC/5 contained in parcel No. V were examined. Lead piece marked BC/4 was found
to be a 455” revolved bullet. No regular rifling marks were observed on BC/4 when
examined under stereomicroscope. Based on the examination carried out in the
laboratory, the result of analysis is as under:
RESULT
1. The 7.62mm fired cartridge cases marked C/1 to C/7 and 7.62 mm fired bullets
marked BC/1 to BC/3 have been fired a country made pistol marked W/2 chambered
for 7.62mm cartridges) [Received in case FSL No. 07/F-3937 FIR No. 311 dated
19.05.06 U/S 307/34 IPC & 25/54/59 A.Act PS Civil Line Rohtak recovered on
25.6.07 Rajesh @ Sarkare) and not from any other firearm even of same make and
bore, because every firearm has got its own individual characteristics marks.
2. The holes on the clothes contained in parcel No. III & IV have been caused by
bullet projectiles.
3. The lead piece marked BC/5 contained in parcel No. V could form part of core of a
bullet.
4. The lead piece marked BC/4 was found to be deformed and mutilated .455”
revolver bullet. No regular rifling marks were observed on BC/4.
5. Report in original from Serology division is enclosed herewith.
Note:- i) Exhibits examined in the Ballistics Division were resealed alongwith their original
wrappers with the seal of A.D.(BALL)/ FSL (H).” The third FSL report has been prepared by RK
Koshal, Assistant Director (Ballistics) at the Forensic Science Laboratory, Madhuban, Karnal. 22 In
evaluating the third FSL report, three crucial aspects need to be flagged at this stage: first, the FSL
report contains a comparison and analysis of what is described in the result as a “country made
pistol marked W/2 chambered for 7.62mm cartridges”; second, the FSL report contains no reference
to the pistol which was marked as W/1 in the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007 in
reference to FIR No. 311 and third, the above extract under the result section indicates that pistol
W/2 (which is the only pistol analysed) was recovered from Rajesh alias Sarkari in the course of the
investigation in FIR No. 311. The above aspects have a crucial bearing on the weight to be ascribed
to the third FSL report.
23 The three aspects which have been highlighted above demonstrate that, out of the alleged two
recoveries of the pistols which were marked as W/1 and W/2 in the course of the investigation into
FIR No. 311, only one of the two pistols, namely W/2, has been analysed with reference to the
cartridges and fired bullets stated to have been recovered from the scene of offence in the present
case. Pistol W/1, as the second FSL report dated 25 September 2007 in relation to FIR No. 311
indicates, was alleged by the prosecution to have been recovered at the behest of accused Rajesh
while pistol W/2 was allegedly recovered from accused Ajay. The third FSL report in the present
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
18

case contains a ballistics analysis of only one of the two pistols namely W/2 and not W/1. Moreover,
the third FSL report contains an erroneous statement that W/2 was recovered at the behest of
Rajesh when, as we have seen, W/2 is a recovery which the prosecution alleges to have been made
from accused Ajay in the course of the investigation in the FIR No. 311. Pistol W/1 was, in other
words, clearly not made available to the examiner for the purpose of a ballistic examination. 24
Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants also highlights the following
discrepancies:
(i) While the recoveries which were made at site are described as 7.62/25mm
cartridges, the FSL report in the context of FIR No. 311 contains a reference to
7.62/30mm cartridges;
(ii) What was test fired for the purposes of the ballistic examination in FIR No.311
were the 7.62/30mm bullets; and
(iii) While the third FSL report dated 29 November 2007 in the present case refers to
mauser pistol fired bullets, the conclusion is at variance in that it refers to a country
made pistol.
25 The submission of the appellants is that the weapon which was seized in the context of the earlier
investigation was not made available to the examiner in the present case at all. This submission was
sought to be refuted by reason of the fact that a test firing of weapon W/2 did take place. 26 Now in
this background an important facet of the matter which requires to be noticed was that neither the
author of the first and second FSL reports in the context of the seizure and recovery of weapons W/1
and W/2 in FIR No. 311; nor the author of the third FSL report in the context of FIR No.781 (the FIR
in the present case) have been examined by the prosecution in the course of the evidence.
27 The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State sought to explain the failure of the
prosecution to examine the ballistics examiners in evidence by submitting that the FSL reports were,
as a matter of fact, filed by the defence after the statements of the appellants under Section 313 of
the CrPC were recorded. This submission was, in particular, urged in response to the grievance of
the appellants that in the statements under Section 313, only Exhibits PD and PF were drawn to the
attention of the accused. Learned Counsel for the State urged that since the FSL reports have been
produced by the defence, the failure of the prosecution to examine the ballistics examiner stands
explained. 28 In this context, it would now be necessary to advert briefly to the legal position. In
Mohinder Singh vs State 10 (“Mohinder Singh”), a three judge Bench of this Court observed:
“12. In a case where death is due to injuries or wounds caused by a lethal weapon, it
has always been considered to be the duty of the prosecution to prove by expert
evidence that it was likely or at least possible for the injuries to have been caused with
the weapon with which and in the manner in which they are alleged to have been
caused. It is elementary that where the prosecution has a definite or positive case, it
must prove the whole of that case. In the present case, it is doubtful whether the
injuries which are attributed to the appellant were caused by a gun or by a rifle.
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
19

Indeed, it seems more likely that they were caused by a rifle than by a gun, and yet
the case for the prosecution is that the appellant was armed with a gun and, in his
examination, it was definitely put to him that he was armed with the gun P-16. It is
only by the AIR 1953 SC 415 evidence of a duly qualified expert that it could have
been ascertained whether the injuries attributed to the appellant were caused by a
gun or by a rifle and such evidence alone could settle the controversy as to whether
they could possibly have been caused by a firearm being used at such a close range as
is suggested in the evidence. It is clear, and it is also the prosecution case, that only 2
shots were fired at Dalip Singh and one of the crucial points which the prosecution
had to prove was that these shots were fired by two persons and not by one man, and
both the shots were fired in such manner and from such distance as is alleged by the
eyewitnesses.” (emphasis supplied)
29 The decision in Mohinder Singh was considered by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court also
consisting of three judges in Gurucharan Singh vs State of Punjab 11 (“Gurucharan Singh”). In
Gurucharan Singh, the Court noted that in the earlier decision, the case of the prosecution was that
the accused had shot the deceased with a gun but it appeared likely that the injury on the deceased
had been inflicted by a rifle and there was no evidence of a duly qualified expert to prove that the
injuries had been caused by a gun. Moreover, the nature of the injuries was such that the shots must
have been fired by more than one person and there was no evidence to show that another person
had also engaged in the shooting. The oral evidence was not of disinterested witnesses. Hence, it was
held that in that backdrop, the failure to examine an expert was a serious infirmity in the
prosecution case. Explaining the facts as they emerged in the earlier decision in Mohinder Singh, the
three judge Bench in Gurucharan Singh held:
(1963) 3 SCR 585 “41. […] It would be noticed that these observations were made in a
case where the prosecution evidence suffered from serious infirmities and in
determining the effect of these observations, it would not be fair or reasonable to
forget the facts in respect of which they came to be made. These observations do not
purport to lay down an inflexible Rule that in every case where an accused person is
charged with murder caused by a lethal weapon, the prosecution case can succeed in
proving the charge only if an expert is examined. It is possible to imagine cases where
the direct evidence is of such an unimpeachable character and the nature of the
injuries disclosed by post-mortem notes is so clearly consistent with the direct
evidence that the examination of a ballistic expert may not be regarded as essential.
Where the direct evidence is not satisfactory or disinterested or where the injuries are
alleged to have been caused with a gun and they prima facie appear to have been
inflicted by a rifle, undoubtedly the apparent inconsistency can be cured or the oral
evidence can be corroborated by leading the evidence of a ballistic expert. In what
cases the examination of a ballistic expert is essential for the proof of the prosecution
case, must naturally depend upon the circumstances of each case.
Therefore, we do not think that Mr Purushottam is right in contending as a general proposition that
in every case where a firearm is alleged to have been used by an accused person, in addition to the
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
20

direct evidence, prosecution must lead the evidence of a ballistic expert, however good the direct
evidence may be and though on the record there may be no reason to doubt the said direct
evidence.” Hence, in Gurucharan Singh, this Court held that there is no inflexible rule to the effect
that the prosecution could succeed in proving the charge of murder alleged to have been caused with
a lethal weapon only if an expert is examined. Where the direct evidence is of an unimpeachable
character and the nature of the injuries disclosed by the post-mortem reports is clearly consistent
with the direct evidence, the examination of a ballistics expert may not be essential. Contrarily, the
evidence of a ballistics expert would assume significance where direct evidence is not satisfactory, or
is of interested witnesses or where the nature of the injuries requires expert corroboration. In other
words, whether the examination of a ballistics expert is necessary is dependent upon the factual
context as it emerges in each case.
30 In Sukhwant Singh vs State of Punjab 12 (“Sukhwant Singh”), a two judge Bench of this Court
held that the omission of the investigating officer to send a recovered empty and sealed pistol to the
ballistics expert for examination was a significant omission. In that context, the bench observed:
“21. […] It hardly needs to be emphasised that in cases where injuries are caused by
firearms, the opinion of the ballistic expert is of a considerable importance where
both the firearm and the crime cartridge are recovered during the investigation to
connect an accused with the crime. Failure to produce the expert opinion before the
trial court in such cases affects the creditworthiness of the prosecution case to a great
extent.”
31 In State of Punjab vs Jugraj Singh 13 (“Jugraj Singh”), a two judge Bench of this Court
distinguished the decision in Sukhwant Singh and noted that in that case the evidence of two
eye-witnesses was held to be inadmissible since they were not examined in terms of Section 138 of
the Evidence Act and the court did not rely on the sole testimony of PW3. Hence, the failure to
produce an expert opinion was held to have affected the credit worthiness of the prosecution case. In
Jugraj Singh, the Court held that: “nowhere it was held [in Sukhwant Singh] that on account of
failure to produce the expert opinion the prosecution version in all cases should be disbelieved”.
Accordingly, in Jugraj Singh, the Court noted:
(1995) 3 SCC 367 (2002) 3 SCC 234 “18. In the instant case the investigating officer
has categorically stated that guns seized were not in a working condition and he, in
his discretion, found that no purpose would be served by sending the same to the
ballistic expert for his opinion. No further question was put to the investigating
officer in cross-examination to find out whether despite the guns being defective the
fire pin was in order or not. In the presence of convincing evidence of two
eyewitnesses and other attending circumstances we do not find that the
non-examination of the expert in this case has, in any way, affected the
creditworthiness of the version put forth by the eyewitnesses.”
32 In Vineet Kumar Chauhan vs State of UP 14, a two judge Bench of this Court has held:
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
21

“11. It cannot be laid down as a general proposition that in every case where a firearm
is allegedly used by an accused person, the prosecution must lead the evidence of a
ballistic expert to prove the charge, irrespective of the quality of the direct evidence
available on record. It needs little emphasis that where direct evidence is of such an
unimpeachable character, and the nature of injuries, disclosed by the post- mortem
notes is consistent with the direct evidence, the examination of ballistic expert may
not be regarded as essential. However, where direct evidence is not available or that
there is some doubt as to whether the injuries could or could not have been caused by
a particular weapon, examination of an expert would be desirable to cure an apparent
inconsistency or for the purpose of corroboration of oral evidence.”
33 In Govindaraju vs State 15, a two judge Bench of this Court drew an adverse inference where no
person from the FSL had been examined. In drawing this conclusion, the Court referred to the
non-production of material witnesses like the doctor, who performed the post-mortem and
examined the victims, and (2007) 14 SCC 660 (2012) 4 SCC 722 the head constable and constable,
who reached the site upon occurrence. Since the other witnesses produced by the prosecution had
also turned hostile, the Court drew an adverse inference against the prosecution for not examining
these material witnesses. The Court noted:
“63. There is certainly some content in the submissions made before us that
non-production of material witnesses like the doctor, who performed the
post-mortem and examined the victim before he was declared dead as well as of the
Head Constable and the constable who reached the site immediately upon the
occurrence and the other two witnesses turning hostile, creates a reasonable doubt in
the case of the prosecution and the court should also draw adverse inference against
the prosecution for not examining the material witnesses. We have already dwelled
upon appreciation of evidence at some length in the facts and circumstances of the
present case. There is deficiency in the case of the prosecution as it should have
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt with the help of these witnesses, which it
chose not to produce before the court, despite their availability.
[…]
66. This Court in Takhaji Hiraji [(2001) 6 SCC 145 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 1070] clearly
stated that material witness is one who would unfold the genesis of the incident or an
essential part of the prosecution case and by examining such witnesses the gaps or
infirmities in the case of the prosecution could be supplied. If such a witness, without
justification, is not examined, inference against the prosecution can be drawn by the
court. The fact that the witnesses who were necessary to unfold the narrative of the
incident and though not examined, but were cited by the prosecution, certainly raises
a suspicion. When the principal witnesses of the prosecution become hostile, greater
is the requirement of the prosecution to examine all other material witnesses who
could depose in completing the chain by proven facts. This view was reiterated by this
Court in Yakub Ismailbhai Patel v. State of Gujarat [(2004) 12 SCC 229 :
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
22

2004 SCC (Cri) 196].”
34 The precedent which we have reviewed above would thus indicate that there is no inflexible rule
which requires the prosecution to examine a ballistics examiner in every case where a murder is
alleged to have been caused with the use of a fire arm. The decision in Mohinder Singh (1953) has
since been explained in Gurucharan Singh (1963) by a co-ordinate Bench. Thereafter, the principle
which has emerged from the line of authority which we have noticed earlier, is that the failure of the
prosecution in a given case, to examine a ballistics expert has to be assessed bearing in mind the
overall context of the nature of the evidence which is available. When direct evidence of an
unimpeachable character is available and the nature of injuries is consistent with the direct
evidence, the examination of a ballistics expert need not be insisted upon as a condition to the
prosecution proving its case. On the other hand, where direct evidence is not available or there is
doubt in regard to the nature of that evidence, the failure to examine the ballistic examiner would
assume significance. In the present case, the weapons of offence were alleged to have been recovered
in the context of the investigation in another FIR (FIR No.311 dated 19 May 2006). The weapons
were marked as W/1 and W/2 in that case. The third FSL report arising out of the investigation in
FIR No. 781 in the present case does not deal with weapon W/1 at all. Moreover, as we have noted
earlier, the third FSL report wrongly attributes weapon W/2 to accused Rajesh alias Sarkari.
Whether or not weapon W/2 had been made available to the ballistics examiner was a matter which
could have been explained if the prosecution were to lead his evidence. The prosecution cited a
ballistics examiner as a witness and yet, did not lead his evidence. This must be juxtaposed in light
of the fact that the eye-witness account of PW4 and PW5 is not free from doubt. We have also
analysed the evidence of PW4 and PW5 and have noted that there is a grave element of doubt as to
whether they were witnesses at the scene of occurrence. In this context, the Court must therefore
hold that the discrepancies which have been noticed in the FSL report could have best been
explained by the authors of FSL reports both in FIR No. 311/2006 and FIR No. 781/2006. This not
having been done, the accused would, in our view, be entitled to the benefit of doubt. 35 The
appellants have urged that PW4 was not an eye-witness as he had deposed that Sandeep was fired at
from a distance of 4-5 feet which is not supported by the medical evidence. They urge that the
blackening of a few firearm injuries on the deceased’s body is conclusive proof that the firing must
have been done from a closer distance, which could be less than 2 feet. 16 Since the depositions of
PW4 and PW5 suffer from several material contradictions and improvements; and the
non-examination of the ballistics expert in light of serious controversies in the FSL reports has cast
a shadow on the prosecution’s story, we need not deal with the additional argument on blackening
of injuries. Refusal to undergo Test Identification Parade 17 36 The prosecution has submitted that
an adverse inference should be drawn against the appellants for refusing to submit themselves to a
TIP. Before we deal with the circumstances in which the appellants declined a TIP, it becomes
essential to scrutinize the precedent from this Court bearing on the subject. A line of precedent of
this Court has dwelt on the purpose of conducting a TIP, the source of the authority of the
investigator to do so, the manner in which these Relies on (2016) 2 SCC 607 TIP proceedings should
be conducted, the weight to be ascribed to identification in the course of a TIP and the
circumstances in which an adverse inference can be drawn against the accused who refuses to
undergo the process. The principles which have emerged from the precedents of this Court can be
summarized as follows:
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
23

(i) The purpose of conducting a TIP is that persons who claim to have seen the
offender at the time of the occurrence identify them from amongst the other
individuals without tutoring or aid from any source. An identification parade, in
other words, tests the memory of the witnesses, in order for the prosecution to
determine whether any or all of them can be cited as eye-
witness to the crime;
(ii) There is no specific provision either in the CrPC or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 18 which lends
statutory authority to an identification parade. Identification parades belong to the stage of the
investigation of crime and there is no provision which compels the investigating agency to hold or
confers a right on the accused to claim a TIP;
(iii) Identification parades are governed in that context by the provision of Section 162 of the CrPC;
Evidence Act
(iv) A TIP should ordinarily be conducted soon after the arrest of the accused, so as to preclude a
possibility of the accused being shown to the witnesses before it is held;
(v) The identification of the accused in court constitutes substantive evidence;
(vi) Facts which establish the identity of the accused person are treated to be relevant under Section
9 of the Evidence Act;
(vii) A TIP may lend corroboration to the identification of the witness in court, if so required;
(viii) As a rule of prudence, the court would, generally speaking, look for corroboration of the
witness’ identification of the accused in court, in the form of earlier identification proceedings. The
rule of prudence is subject to the exception when the court considers it safe to rely upon the
evidence of a particular witness without such, or other corroboration;
(ix) Since a TIP does not constitute substantive evidence, the failure to hold it does not ipso facto
make the evidence of identification inadmissible;
(x) The weight that is attached to such identification is a matter to be determined by the court in the
circumstances of that particular case;
(xi) Identification of the accused in a TIP or in court is not essential in every case where guilt is
established on the basis of circumstances which lend assurance to the nature and the quality of the
evidence; and
(xii) The court of fact may, in the context and circumstances of each case, determine whether an
adverse inference should be drawn against the accused for refusing to participate in a TIP. However,
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
24

the court would look for corroborating material of a substantial nature before it enters a finding in
regard to the guilt of the accused.
37 These principles have evolved over a period of time and emanate from the following decisions:
1. Matru v. State of U.P. [(1971) 2 SCC 75 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 391]
2. Santokh Singh v. Izhar Hussain [(1973) 2 SCC 406 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 828]
3. Malkhansingh v. State of M.P. [(2003) 5 SCC 746 :
2003 SCC (Cri) 1247]
4. Visveswaran v. State [(2003) 6 SCC 73]
5. Munshi Singh Gautam v. State of M.P. [(2005) 9 SCC 631]
6. Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi) [(2010) 6 SCC 1],
7. Ashwani Kumar and Ors. v. State of Punjab (2015) 6 SCC 308.
8. Mukesh and Ors. v. State for NCT of Delhi and Ors. AIR 2017 SC 2161.
38 In the backdrop of these principles, it would be necessary to scrutinize the evidence in the
present case. PW4 in the course of his cross examination stated that the deceased had been facing
trial in 2-3 cases and that he was a surety for his son. He claimed to be ignorant of the fact that the
deceased was a co- accused with Rajesh alias Sarkari in a criminal case arising out of FIR No.
341/2001, under Sections 454 and 380 of the IPC at Police Station Civil Lines, Rohtak, inspite of
being the deceased’s surety in the same. Nor did he know whether both of them had been arrested in
the case arising out of FIR No. 341 on 24 June 2001. Similarly, PW5, during the course of his
cross-examination, professed that he did not know whether the deceased was the co-accused with
Rajesh alias Sarkari in the case arising out of FIR No. 341. But immediately thereafter a suggestion
was put to him, which he accepted, that he and his father (PW4) used to go to the court when his
brother– the deceased Sandeep – and the present accused Rajesh alias Sarkari were being produced
in the court on various dates of hearings. He denied the suggestion that PW4 would visit on every
date of hearing in court. When PW5 was questioned during the course of cross- examination on
whether he had seen the photographs of the accused Rajesh in the newspapers, he said:
“I have never seen the photographs of accused Rajesh alias Sarkari in the
newspapers. The photos of this accused must have been published in the newspapers
so many times but I have never seen his photographs in the newspaper. I hate the
face of Rajesh alias Sarkari and due to this reason, I did not see his photograph in the
newspaper’’.
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
25

39 Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State has sought to urge that out of all
the three publications which were proved in the course of the evidence, only one
contained the names of the accused. However, the central point in this case is
whether on the basis of significant aspects which have emerged during the course of
cross-examination of PW4 and PW5, an adverse inference should be drawn against
the appellants for having refused to undergo a TIP. The evidence on the record
indicates that not only did the deceased have several criminal cases against him,
some of which had ended in acquittal on account of a compromise, but that one of the
appellants, Rajesh alias Sarkari, and the deceased were co-accused in a case arising
out of FIR No. 341 dated 23 June 2001 under Sections 454 and 380 of the IPC at
Police Station Civil Lines, Rohtak.
Evidently both of them had been arrested in connection with the case, which is why PW5 deposed
that his father PW4 used to go to court when Sandeep and Rajesh were being produced on various
dates of hearing. PW4 also stated that he has stood surety for his son in various criminal cases. In
this backdrop, the contention of the appellants that the refusal to undergo a TIP is borne out by the
fact that Sandeep and Rajesh were known to each other prior to the occurrence and that PW4, who
is a prime eye-witness, had seen Rajesh when he would attend the court during the course of the
hearings, cannot be brushed aside. Consequently, in a case, such as the present, the Court would be
circumspect about drawing an adverse inference from the facts, as they have emerged. In any event,
as we have noticed, the identification in the course of a TIP is intended to lend assurance to the
identity of the accused. The finding of guilt cannot be based purely on the refusal of the accused to
undergo an identification parade. In the present case, we have already indicated the presence of the
alleged eye- witnesses PW4 and PW5 at the scene of the occurrence is seriously in doubt. The
ballistics evidence connecting the empty cartridges and the bullets recovered from the body of the
deceased with an alleged weapon of offence is contradictory and suffers from serious infirmities.
Hence, in this backdrop, a refusal to undergo a TIP assumes secondary importance, if at all, and
cannot survive independently in the absence of it being a substantive piece of evidence. 40 For the
above reasons, we have arrived at the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to establish its case
beyond reasonable doubt. The appellants are, hence, entitled to the benefit of doubt and are
acquitted of the offence with which they have been charged. The Court is apprised of the fact that the
appellants have undergone over 12 years of imprisonment. Consequent on the present judgment
acquitting the appellants, they shall be released and their bail bonds be cancelled unless they are
wanted in connection with any other case. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
41 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….………….…………………................................J. [Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]
… . . … … . … … … … . … … … … … … … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .  [ I n d u  M a l h o t r a ]
………….………….…………………...........................J. [Indira Banerjee] New Delhi;
November 03, 2020.
Rajesh @ Sarkari vs The State Of Haryana on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61904359/
26
