Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26
October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 5375, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
789
Author: Surya Kant
Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, Surya Kant, N.V. Ramana
                                                                                    REPO
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2187−88 of 2011
       Raveen Kumar                                                          ..... Appel
                                                      VERSUS
       State of Himachal Pradesh                                           .....Responde
                                                  JUDGMENT
Surya Kant, J:
These Criminal Appeals have been heard over video− conferencing.
2. The appellant, Raveen Kumar, challenges the judgment dated 23.04.2010 and the order dated
18.05.2010 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, whereby his
acquittal under Section 20 of the Narcotics, Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (“NDPS
Act”) was reversed and a sentence of two−years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.50,000 was
instead imposed.
FACTS
3. Briefly put, the prosecution case is that on 01.11.1994 at around 3:30 P.M., a police party while
conducting traffic checks for Page | 1 suspected ammunition near the HP−J&K border at Surangani,
stopped a Maruti van which was being driven by the appellant. The police in the course of
rummaging found that the van was loaded with tins of ghee, a bag of maize, 20 bottles of honey,
rajmah, angithi, thermos, stepney and some other miscellaneous articles. A polythene bag
underneath the driver’s seat was also discovered. Suspecting it to contain narcotics, the police
summoned two local shopkeepers (including Nam Singh, PW1) as independent witnesses. The
appellant was informed of his statutory right to be searched in the presence of a magistrate or
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
1

gazetted officer but he consented to being searched by the police party itself. The contents of the bag
were then examined and charas, in the form of dhoopbati and balls was found. It was weighed using
scales obtained from a nearby shop and was found to be 1 kg and 230 gms. After a 10 gm sample of
the contraband was extracted, the charas was sealed and seized, and other procedural formalities
were completed. The appellant was arrested and statement of one of the two independent witnesses
– Nam Singh (PW1) was recorded. The sample was sent for chemical analysis where it was
confirmed to be charas with a resin content of 34.5%. The prosecution, accordingly, charged the
appellant for offence under Section 20 of the NDPS Act.
4. Over the course of trial, five witnesses were examined by the Page | 2 prosecution and various
documents including PW1’s statement, appellant’s written consent for search, recovery memo,
arrest memo, seals and site plan were adduced in evidence. PW1 was declared hostile by the
prosecution as he denied having personally witnessed seizure of the charas, but nevertheless he
broadly supported the prosecution case as regards procedural compliances, sealing of the recovered
narcotics and presence of the appellant. PW2 to PW5, being police witnesses, corroborated the
prosecution version regarding search, seizure, and other statutory compliances under the NDPS Act.
The appellant, in his defence, denied possession of any prohibited substance and claimed that the
charges were fabricated by the police given his earlier refusal to contribute money towards a sports
meet organised by the jurisdictional police. No defence evidence, however, was led and the appellant
instead focused on highlighting contradictions between statements of the police witnesses.
5. The learned Special Judge vide his judgment dated 10.07.1995, acquitted the appellant observing
that possession of a prohibited substance had not been proved beyond reasonable doubt. In
reaching such conclusion, the Court placed heavy reliance on an earlier reply dated 09.11.1994 −
given by the prosecution to oppose appellant’s prayer for bail, wherein the police claimed that the
appellant “roams in the area in the vehicle in the guise of a contractor and usually deals in Page | 3
Contraband articles. Earlier also on 27.10.94, reliable secret information was received that he was
carrying charas 7 kgs in the same vehicle. He was chased … but he could not be nabbed … He has
been under observation for a long time.” In the opinion of the trial Court, this unambiguously
negated PW2 and PW5’s depositions that they did not know or previously engage with the appellant.
It also became the sole factor to conclude that the police, in fact, had previous information of the
alleged smuggling and the chance recovery was nothing but a deliberately crafted narrative to
circumvent the legal safeguards under the NDPS Act, which consequently weakened the very
foundations of the case. The Special Judge also noted that there was a contradiction in the
statements of PW2 and PW5, and that the only independent witness had not supported the
prosecution version.
6. The respondent−State appealed before the High Court, which through judgment dated
23.04.2010 held that the reasoning of the trial Court was totally fallacious. The High Court upon re−
appreciating the entire evidence on record, observed that first, the trial Court had wrongly discarded
the statement of PW1, for he had corroborated major parts of the prosecution version and had
merely pleaded ignorance to recovery of the polythene bag. Second, the conviction was possible even
in the absence of any independent witness. Third, it was Page | 4 shown how the version of PW2 and
PW5 could be reconciled and any possible contradiction would be remote and immaterial. Fourth
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
2

and most crucially, PW5 (Investigating Officer) had not been confronted with the prosecution’s
earlier reply to the bail application and thus the same could not be relied upon to doubt the
prosecution version. The High Court further opined that the alternate theory propounded by the
defence was selectively not suggested to PW5. Given these two facts, there was nothing to infer that
there was any prior information and the case was clearly one of chance recovery, thus ameliorating
the requirements to comply with Section 42 of the NDPS Act.
7. The High Court thereafter heard the appellant on the quantum of sentence and passed a separate
order of sentencing dated 18.05.2010, observing that although the quantity of the seized charas was
1 kg 230 gms but the pure resin content was only 424 gms, which was not a ‘commercial quantity’.
Further, giving due weight to the appellant’s dependants and the over 15 years delay in trial, the
High Court awarded a lenient sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs 50,000
(or further one−year imprisonment in lieu thereof).
CONTENTIONS OF PARTIES
8. The aggrieved appellant has challenged the reversal of his acquittal, asserting that the High Court
exceeded its jurisdiction in Page | 5 setting−aside the trial Court’s reasoned order. It was vehemently
contended by his learned counsel that once the sole independent witness had disowned the
prosecution case, it would be unjustified to convict the appellant by trusting the police version. The
contents of the reply dated 09.11.1994 were re−agitated with a view to prove that the case was not of
chance recovery and in case of two possible views on the same set of evidence, the one favouring
acquittal ought to be taken. It was contended that the reply, being a court record, was not required
to be proved like a statement recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(“CrPC”). Additionally, leniency was sought sighting the now−advanced age of the appellant and the
low quantity of the narcotics recovered.
9. These pleas for acquittal and leniency have been ably controverted by learned State counsel who
supports the judgment and order of the High Court. He urged that the conviction can be well
sustained in such like cases solely on the strength of testimonies of official witnesses and despite
non−corroboration by an independent witness. He further demonstrated how the trial Court had
impermissibly relied upon the reply document when the same had not been brought forth at the
stage of PW5’s cross−examination. It was also submitted that more than adequate leniency has
already been shown at the sentencing stage as the High Court had imposed Page | 6 punishment for
only the pure resin content, whereas the entire weight of the mixture, including its neutral
substance, ought to have been considered.
ANALYSIS
10. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the record, we find that these
appeals raise the following three questions of law: (A) What is the scope and essence of the High
Court’s appellate jurisdiction against a judgment of acquittal?; (B) What is the extent of reliance
upon a document with which the other side was not confronted with during cross−examination?;
and (C) Whether non− examination of independent witnesses vitiates the prosecution case?
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
3

Additionally, considering that the question of sentencing arose for the first time before the High
Court, the possibility of taking a lenient view in the present circumstances also requires
consideration. A) Scope of appeal in cases of acquittal
11. The appellant’s contention that the High Court could not have set aside a finding of acquittal, is
legally unfounded. It has been settled through a catena of decisions that there is no difference of
power, scope, jurisdiction or limitation under the CrPC between appeals against judgments of
conviction or of acquittal. An appellate Court is free to re−consider questions of both law and fact,
and re− Page | 7 appreciate the entirety of evidence on record. There is, nonetheless, a self−restraint
on the exercise of such power, considering the interests of justice and the fundamental principle of
presumption of innocence. Thus, in practice, appellate Courts are reluctant to interfere with orders
of acquittal, especially when two reasonable conclusions are possible on the same material.1
12. This Court has very illustratively, in State of UP v. Banne2, listed circumstances were
interference of an appellate Court against acquittal would be justified. These would include patent
errors of law, grave miscarriage of justice, or perverse findings of fact. In turn, Babu v. State of
Kerala3, clarified that “findings of fact recorded by a court can be held to be perverse if the findings
have been arrived at by ignoring or excluding relevant material or by taking into consideration
irrelevant/inadmissible material” or if they are ‘against the weight of evidence’ or if they suffer from
the ‘vice of irrationality’.
13. Further, this Court in exercise of its powers under Article 136, would ordinarily only examine
whether the High Court has failed to correctly apply these principles governing appeals against
acquittal. It would be aptly beneficial to quote what this Court has observed in Ram Jag v. State of
UP4:
Ramabhupala Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1970) 3 SCC 474. (2009) 4 SCC
271, ¶ 28.
(2010) 9 SCC 189, ¶ 20.
(1974) 4 SCC 201.
Page | 8 “14. If after applying these principles, not by their mechanical recitation in the judgment,
the High Court has reached the conclusion that the order of acquittal ought to be reversed, this
Court will not reappraise evidence in appeals brought before it under Article 136 of the Constitution.
In such appeals, only such examination of the evidence would ordinarily be necessary as is required
to see whether the High Court has applied the principles correctly. The High Court is the final Court
of facts and the reserve jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136, though couched in wide terms, is
by long practice exercised in exceptional cases where the High Court has disregarded the guidelines
set by this Court for deciding appeals against acquittal or “by disregard to the forms of legal process
or some violation of the principles of natural justice or otherwise, substantial and grave injustice has
been done” or where the finding is such that it shocks the conscience of the Court. … A finding
reached by the application of correct principles cannot shock judicial conscience and this Court does
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
4

not permit its conscience to be projected save where known and recognised tests of testimonial
assessment are totally disregarded; otherwise, conscience can become an unruly customer.”
14. There is, therefore, no legal necessity for us to re−appreciate the entire evidence merely on the
premise that the High Court has convicted the appellant for the first time in exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction. Instead, the scope of the present appeals ought to be restricted to test whether the trial
Court’s order was indeed perverse and whether the High Court’s re−appreciation of evidence and
consequent conviction was founded on cogent evidence. B) Reliance on prosecution’s reply to bail
application Page | 9
15. It is apparent that the appellant’s acquittal was primarily based upon the finding that the case
was not one of ‘chance recovery’. The trial Court reached such finding solely on the basis of certain
averments made in a written reply submitted on 09.11.1994 by the prosecution in opposition to the
appellant’s bail application.
16. Learned counsel for the appellant could not fairly dispute the distinction between ‘replies’
submitted to the Court in some pending proceedings, as compared to the statements recorded by the
police under Section 161 of CrPC. Nevertheless, a Court should be over− cautious to place reliance
on a piece of evidence with which the concerned witness has not been confronted despite an
opportunity to do so. Although there is no need to separately prove the court records emanating
during trial but no legal presumption can be extended to the veracity of the contents of such
documents. The reply filed in court proceedings, at best, can be treated as an admission; which as
held by this Court in Sita Ram Bhau Patil v. Ramchandra Nago Patil5, must not only be proved, but
also the opposite party must be confronted with it at the stage of cross examination. It would be
apposite to extract the cited judgment to the following effect:
“17. If admission is proved and if it is thereafter to be used against the party who has
made it the question comes within the provisions of Section 145 of the Evidence Act.
The provisions in the (1977) 2 SCC 49.
Page | 10 Indian Evidence Act that “admission is not conclusive proof” are to be considered in
regard to two features of evidence. First, what weight is to be attached to an admission? In order to
attach weight it has to be found out whether the admission is clear, unambiguous and is a relevant
piece of evidence. Second, even if the admission is proved in accordance with the provisions of the
Evidence Act and if it is to be used against the party who has made it, “it is sound that if a witness is
under cross− examination on oath, he should be given an opportunity, if the documents are to be
used against him, to tender his explanation and to clear up the point of ambiguity or dispute. This is
a general salutary and intelligible rule” … Therefore, a mere proof of admission, after the person
whose admission it is alleged to be has concluded his evidence, will be of no avail and cannot be
utilised against him.” [emphasis supplied]
17. The High Court has correctly noted in the present case that no opportunity to controvert this
reply document was given to the prosecution, nor was PW5 confronted with it. Moreover, no weight
can be accorded to such reply when the trial Court itself, while rejecting bail on 17.11.1994, had
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
5

interpreted the same to conclude that the police “was not having a prior information that the
petitioner was carrying Charas in his Maruti Van, though, it appears, that there was a general
information against the petitioner indulging in such activities.”
18. Since irrelevant material was impermissibly relied upon by the trial Court to arrive at an
acquittal, the High Court was adequately Page | 11 justified to interfere with and reverse the
findings.
C) Need for independent witnesses
19. It would be gainsaid that lack of independent witnesses are not fatal to the prosecution case. 6
However, such omissions cast an added duty on Courts to adopt a greater−degree of care while
scrutinising the testimonies of the police officers, which if found reliable can form the basis of a
successful conviction.
20. The trial Court held that no independent witness supported the prosecution case and that the
testimonies of the star police−witnesses, namely, PW2 and PW5, were contradictory. Both these
observations are unreasoned and unsubstantiated by the evidence on record. The High Court, on the
contrary, has given cogent and lucid reasons as to how the testimony of PW1 (alleged hostile
independent witness) also substantially supports the prosecution case.
21. Although declared hostile by the prosecution, Nam Singh (PW1), admits to being literate and
having signed his statement on the spot. During cross−examination he admits to having duly
perused the contents of these documents before having signed them, and of not being under any
form of police pressure, thus, seriously undermining any oral statement to the contrary. His
deposition independently establishes that the Maruti van of the appellant had indeed been stopped,
the appellant’s consent was taken, a search had been Kalpnath Rai v. State, (1998) AIR SC 201, ¶ 9.
Page | 12 conducted, certain items were seized and some substance had been weighed and sealed.
Although PW1 claimed not to have specifically witnessed seizure of the charas, but he has not denied
so either. He submits that he had gone back to his shop to attend to some customers at that stage of
the search. However, he admits to having been shown the extracted sample of charas, which he
identified before the trial Court. Thus, far from undermining the prosecution version, PW1’s
statement broadly corroborates and strengthens the seizure of contraband substance from the
possession of the appellant.
22. As regards the question of contradiction between PW2 and PW5’s statements, we find that the
High Court’s observations are unimpeachable. It would indeed be patently wrong to suggest that
PW5 deposed that the independent witnesses were called after the suspected contraband had
already been recovered from underneath the driver’s seat. In fact, both PW2 and PW5 unequivocally
state that the polythene bag was inspected only after the independent witnesses had arrived. There
might be some confusion over the timing of removal of the other substances, being the tins of ghee,
honey, maize etc., but such trivialities are not material.
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
6

D) Leniency in sentencing
23. After having given a very generous consideration to the appellant’s age and circumstances, as
well as the delay in trial and Page | 13 appeal, we feel that it would serve the interests of justice to
simply not disturb the sentence of two years’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.50,000 which
has been awarded by the High Court.
24. We say so for the reason that the law on minimum mandatory sentence, both at the time of
commission of the offence and at the stage of appeal, prohibits any imprisonment lower than a term
of ten years. Section 20(ii) of the NDPS Act, as it stood before the amendment of 20017, specified
that where contravention relates to cannabis in a form other than ganja, then the same shall be
punishable with “rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to twenty years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
and which may extend to two lakh rupees”.
25. Similarly, Section 20(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act, as it stands post the amendment of 2001, specifies
the same minimum mandatory punishment of ten years for possession of ‘commercial quantity’ of
cannabis. The High Court, as the law was being misconstrued at that time, relied upon the quantity
of pure resin content of 424 gms. Instead, as now stands clarified by a co−ordinate Bench of this
Court in Hira Singh v. Union of India8 the total quantity of the mixture, which includes the neutral
substance, ought to be relevant for Section 7, Act 9 of 2001.
2020 SCC OnLine SC 382, ¶ 10(II).
Page | 14 purposes of sentencing. This total quantity in the instant case is 1 kg 230 gms, which
exceeds the definition of ‘commercial quantity’ as specified at Sl. No. 23 in Notification S.O. 1055
(E), dated 19.10.2001. Thus, the sentence accorded by the High Court is clearly already far too
charitable.
CONCLUSION
26. For the afore−stated reasons, the appeals are dismissed. The appellant’s bail bonds are cancelled
and the respondent−State is directed to take the appellant into custody to serve the remainder of his
two years’ sentence.
…………………………….. J.
(N.V. RAMANA) …………………………… J.
(SURYA KANT) …………………………...J. (HRISHIKESH ROY) NEW DELHI DATED : 26.10.2020
Page | 15
Raveen Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 26 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72095208/
7
