Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4297, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
722
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: M.R. Shah, R. Subhash Reddy, Ashok Bhushan
                                                          REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 580 OF 2020
                                (Arising out of S.L.P.(Criminal) No.4422/2019)
         Rizwan Khan                                           …Appellant
                                          Versus
         The State of Chhattisgarh                             …Respondent
                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned Judgment and Order dated 01.10.2018
passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No. 881/2012, by which the
High Court has dismissed the said appeal preferred by the appellant herein – original accused No.1
and has confirmed the Judgment and Order of Conviction and Sentence passed by the learned
Special Court convicting the accused – appellant no.1 for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of
Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘NDPS Act’) and
sentencing him to undergo five years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs.25,000/−, in default, to
undergo further one year’s rigorous imprisonment, original accused no.1 has preferred the present
appeal.
3. The facts leading to the present appeal are, that the appellant – accused no.1 and one another –
Pukhraj were charged for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act, having in their
possession 20 kg each prohibited Narcotic Substance – Ganja. As per the case of the prosecution, 20
kg of Ganja was recovered from the possession of the appellant from the motor cycle. Nothing
objectionable was found from the person of the accused. Accused were informed about Section 50 of
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
1

the NDPS Act through a notice and were also told about their legal rights that if they want their
search was to be done either by a Gazetted Officer or Judicial Magistrate of First Class or any other
investigating officer. After giving permission that the search can be conducted by any investigating
officer, accused was asked to open the sack kept on his motor cycle and on opening the same, a bag
of Ganja weighing 20kg was found. Panchnama was made of seizure. Samples of narcotics recovered
from the accused were tested by smelling, burning and tasting it and was found to be Ganja. An
identification panchnama was prepared. The Ganja recovered from the accused was about 20 kg, out
of which two packets each of about 100 gm were made for sampling and then the weight panchnama
was made. The samples were sealed and an entry was made in the seizure list on which sample seal
was marked. Samples were marked as ‘B1’ and ‘B2’ and rest of the seized substance was marked as
‘B’. The accused was arrested along with the other accused from whom also the contraband narcotic
substance was found. At this stage, it is required to be noted that ASI J.K. Sen (PW4) received the
information and it was recorded by him in Dehati Nalsi and FIR in the police station. However,
subsequently, all further investigation was carried out by Police Inspector Ashish Shukla – PW5,
who investigated the matter after registration of the FIR and recorded statement of witnesses. The
information of the complete investigation was given to Special Judge, NDPS and also the Municipal
Police Officer. The packets of the narcotic substance made were sent to the laboratory for testing
through constable. The substance seized was found to be Ganja. On completion of the investigation
against the accused under the NDPS Act, appellant and one another – Pukhraj were chargesheeted
for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act and another co− accused Rakesh Kumar
was charged for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act. All the accused pleaded not
guilty and therefore they came to be tried for the aforesaid offences. In the present case, we are
concerned with original accused no.1 – Rizwan Khan and therefore we shall consider the case
against Rizwan Khan only;
3.1 To prove the case against the accused, the prosecution examined eight witnesses, out of which
PW1 – Bholu and PW6 – Kanhaiya are the independent witnesses. PW3 – Sudeep Prasad Mishra is
the constable who had taken the samples to FSL. PW4 was the police officer who recorded the
information and thereafter the FIR. PW5 – Ashish Shukla investigated the case after registration of
the FIR by J.K. Sen, PW4. The prosecution also produced on record the documentary evidence, such
as, seizure memo, FSL report, etc. After closure of the evidence on behalf of the prosecution, further
statement of the accused under Section 313, Cr.P.C. was recorded. The case on behalf of the
appellant – original accused no.1 was of total denial.
4. After conclusion of the trial and on appreciation of the evidence on record, the learned Special
Judge held the accused guilty for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act and
sentenced him to undergo five years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.25,000/−, in default, to
undergo further one year’s rigorous imprisonment.
5. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order of conviction and
sentence passed by the learned Special Judge, the appellant herein preferred an appeal before the
High Court. Before the High Court, one of the main submissions on behalf of the appellant was that
as ASI J.K.Sen (PW4), who seized the articles and lodged FIR also participated in investigation and
therefore the complainant and the investigator being the same, in view of the decision of this Court
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
2

in the case of Mohan Lal v. State of Punjab reported in (2018) 17 SCC 627, the accused is entitled to
acquittal. Number of other submissions were also made before the High Court on behalf of the
accused, as mentioned in paragraph 4 of the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court.
5.1 After having noted that ASI J.K. Sen (PW4) only seized the articles and lodged the FIR and
thereafter no further investigation was carried out by him and the further investigation was carried
out by PW5 – Ashish Shukla, the decision of this Court in the case of Mohan Lal (supra) shall not be
applicable. After considering the submissions made on behalf of the respective parties, by the
impugned judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the said appeal preferred by accused
no.1 and has confirmed the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned
Special Judge. Hence, the present appeal.
6. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant – original accused no.1 has made the following
submissions:
i) that mandatory provisions of Section 42 of the NDPS Act has not been complied
with;
ii) that both the learned Special Court and the High Court have committed a grave
error in convicting the appellant on the sole testimony of the police officers;
iii) that panchnama witnesses have not supported the version of the prosecution and
the person who weighed the quantity of Ganja is also not supported the case of the
prosecution;
iv) that out of the eight witnesses examined, the independent witnesses have not
supported the prosecution story and were declared hostile;
v) that alleged seizure of contraband from the appellant/accused from his motor cycle
is also doubtful as its number on the different documents is not same; that in Ex.
P/10 its number is mentioned as 8499 while in Ex. P/16 and P/37 its number is
mentioned as 4489; that samples seized from the appellant/accused were marked as
‘B1’ and ‘B2’, whereas the letter sent to Senior Superintendent of Police as per Ex.
P/33 shows article ‘A1’ was seized from the accused and therefore it is not proved that
the contraband which is seized from the appellant/accused was sent for examination;
that the sample was not deposited in safe custody and it is not mentioned in
malkhana register;
vi) that non−recovery of the motor cycle is also fatal to the case of the prosecution;
vii) that the seal was not kept in safe custody as PW7 has stated that he did not made
any entry of seal in the register of malkhana;
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
3

vii) that no sample of the seal was sent along with the samples to the FSL for the
purpose of comparing with the seal appearing on the samples of contraband allegedly
recovered from the appellant/accused;
viii) that non−examination of constables who accompanied PW4 at the time of
recovery also creates serious doubt on the prosecution case.
6.1 Learned counsel appearing for the appellant/accused has further submitted that there are such a
large number of discrepancies, if a cumulative effect thereto is taken into consideration on the basis
of the permissive inference would be that serious doubts are created with respect to the
prosecution’s endeavour to prove the fact of possession of contraband by the appellant/accused;
6.2 Learned counsel appearing for the appellant/accused has further submitted that by now the
appellant/accused has already undergone three years of sentence out of five years awarded to him. It
is prayed that as Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act does not provide for any minimum sentence
and if this Court is not satisfied with the submissions of the appellant on merits, then in that case, a
lenient view may be taken and sentence of five years may be reduced to the period already
undergone by the appellant/accused.
7. The present appeal is vehemently opposed by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent – State of Chhattisgarh. It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondent – State that in the present case on appreciation of evidence and after
considering the fact that the investigating officer has taken all precautions and measures which are
required to be taken under the provisions of the NDPS Act, both the courts below have rightly
convicted the accused for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act; 7.1 It is further
submitted that in the present case the prosecution has established and proved beyond doubt,
compliance of the procedure prescribed under the NDPS Act, more particularly, Sections 42, 50 and
55 of the NDPS Act. It is submitted that the compliance of the aforesaid provisions has been
established and proved by the prosecution by examining the witnesses, PW3, PW4, PW5, PW7 and
PW8;
7.2 It is further submitted that though in the present case the independent witnesses (Panchnama
witnesses) have turned hostile, that does not adversely affect the case of the prosecution. It is
submitted that the prosecution has been successful in proving the case against the accused by
examining the reliable witnesses, i.e., PW3, PW4, PW5, PW7 and PW8. It is submitted that merely
because the independent witnesses who have signed the seizure documents turned hostile, the
evidence of other witnesses, may be police officials, cannot be discarded. It is submitted that only on
the independent witnesses turning hostile, the entire case of the prosecution cannot be disregarded;
7.3 It is further submitted that in the present case the prosecution witnesses fully supported the case
of the prosecution and they are found to be trustworthy and no question of enmity came up between
them and the accused persons. Reliance is placed upon the decision of this Court in the case of P.P.
Fathima v. State of Kerala, (2003) 8 SCC 726; Baldev Singh v. State of Haryana, (2015) 17 SCC 554;
and State of Himachal Pradesh v. Pradeep Kumar, (2018) 13 SCC 808;
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
4

7.4 Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that the complainant and the investigating
officer was the same and therefore the trial is vitiated is concerned, it is submitted that in the
present case, as such, the said question does not arise as in the present case the investigation has
been carried out by police inspector Ashish Shukla, PW5 and Shri J.K. Sen, PW4 only recorded the
FIR. It is submitted that even otherwise in view of the recent decision of this Court in the case of
Mukesh Singh v. State (Narcotic Branch) (Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Diary No.39528/2018,
decided on 31.08.2020) under the NDPS Act, the decision of this Court in the case of Mohan Lal
(supra) is not a good law;
7.5 It is further submitted that in the present case finding of guilt of the accused is based upon
corroborative statements of PW4 (J.K. Sen) with PW3(Sudeep Prasad Mishra), PW5 (Ashish
Shukla), PW7 (Nagender Singh), PW8 (Ishwar Prasad Verma) coupled with the forensic report. It is
submitted that in the present case the prosecution case does not rest solely on the testimony of PW4
as is submitted on behalf of the accused; 7.6 Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused
that as in the memorandum of Superintendent of Police the sample is written as ‘A1’, whereas
recovery from the appellant – Rizwan Khan was marked as ‘B1’ and ‘B2’ and therefore there are
material contradictions and therefore it is doubtful whether the samples which were seized from the
appellant – accused were sent to the FSL, it is vehemently submitted that in fact there was a clerical
error in numbering of sample in memorandum of Superintendent of Police. It is submitted that
otherwise the records clearly established that recovery from Rizwan Khan was marked as ‘B1’ and
‘B2’ and the treasury record also established that narcotic substances recovered from Rizwan Khan
were ‘B1’ and ‘B2’ and the said samples were sent to the FSL; 7.7 It is further submitted that the
prosecution having failed to prove the ownership of the motor cycle (vehicle) and/or failed to
recover the motor cycle subsequently, does not vitiate the prosecution case as the accused persons
were found on the spot with the contraband articles in the vehicle. It is submitted that therefore the
commission of an offence under the NDPS Act is proved against them. It is submitted that it is not a
case where ownership of the vehicle is to be determined but commission of an offence under the
NDPS Act was to be ascertained; 7.8 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid
decisions of this Court, it is prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
8. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.
8.1 We have scanned and re−appreciated the entire evidence on record. We have also considered the
findings recorded by the learned Special Court, confirmed by the High Court. 8.2 Having gone
through the entire evidence on record and the findings recorded by the courts below, we are of the
opinion that in the present case the prosecution has been successful in proving the case against the
accused by examining the witnesses PW3, PW4, PW5, PW7 and PW8. It is true that all the aforesaid
witnesses are police officials and two independent witnesses who were panchnama witnesses had
turned hostile. However, all the aforesaid police witnesses are found to be reliable and trustworthy.
All of them have been thoroughly cross−examined by the defence. There is no allegation of any
enmity between the police witnesses and the accused. No such defence has been taken in the
statement under Section 313, Cr.P.C. There is no law that the evidence of police officials, unless
supported by independent evidence, is to be discarded and/or unworthy of acceptance.
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
5

It is settled law that the testimony of the official witnesses cannot be rejected on the ground of non−
corroboration by independent witness. As observed and held by this Court in catena of decisions,
examination of independent witnesses is not an indispensable requirement and such non−
examination is not necessarily fatal to the prosecution case, [see Pardeep Kumar (supra)].
In the recent decision in the case of Surinder Kumar v. State of Punjab, (2020) 2 SCC 563, while
considering somewhat similar submission of non−examination of independent witnesses, while
dealing with the offence under the NDPS Act, in paragraphs 15 and 16, this Court observed and held
as under:
“15. The judgment in Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab (2011) 3 SCC 521, relied on by
the counsel for the respondent State also supports the case of the prosecution. In the
aforesaid judgment, this Court has held that merely because prosecution did not
examine any independent witness, would not necessarily lead to conclusion that the
accused was falsely implicated. The evidence of official witnesses cannot be
distrusted and disbelieved, merely on account of their official status.
16. In State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sunil, (2011) 1 SCC 652, it was held as under: (SCC p.
655) “It is an archaic notion that actions of the police officer should be approached
with initial distrust. It is time now to start placing at least initial trust on the actions
and the documents made by the police. At any rate, the court cannot start with the
presumption that the police records are untrustworthy.
As a proposition of law, the presumption should be the other way round. That official acts of the
police have been regularly performed is a wise principle of presumption and recognised even by the
legislature.” Applying the law laid down by this Court on the evidence of police officials/police
witnesses to the facts of the case in hand, referred to hereinabove, we are of the opinion as the police
witnesses are found to be reliable and trustworthy, no error has been committed by both the courts
below in convicting the accused relying upon the deposition of the police officials.
9. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused with respect to non−compliance of the
procedure prescribed under Section 42 of the NDPS Act is concerned, on considering the deposition
of PW8 (Ishwar Prasad Verma), compliance of the procedure prescribed under Section 42 of the
NDPS Act has been established and proved.
9.1 Similarly, compliance under Section 55 of the NDPS Act has also been established and proved by
the prosecution by examining PW3 and PW7.
9.2 It has been established and proved that the samples which were seized and sealed were sent to
the FSL. From the record, it establishes that the recovery from Rizwan Khan was marked as ‘B1’ and
‘B2’ and the treasury record also that the narcotic substances recovered from Rizwan Khan were
shown as ‘B1’ and ‘B2’. There seems to be some clerical error in numbering of sample in
memorandum of Superintendent of Police and the same was mentioned as ‘A1’. However, it has
been established and proved that the samples which were seized and sealed from Rizwan were sent
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
6

to the FSL. The aforesaid aspect has been dealt with by the learned Special Court in its judgment in
paragraphs 25 and 26.
10. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that as PW4 – J.K. Sen who recorded the
FIR, he himself was the investigating officer and therefore the trial is vitiated is concerned, it is
required to be noted that initially learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused made the
above submission relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Mohan Lal (supra). However,
in view of the recent decision of this Court in the case of Mukesh Singh (supra) overruling the
decision of this Court in the case of Mohan Lal (supra), learned counsel appearing for the accused
has not pressed the above ground. Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that in the present case
the aforesaid issue does not arise as after the FIR was recorded by Shri J.K. Sen, PW4, thereafter the
case was investigated by Ashish Shukla, PW5. Therefore, on facts, both the complainant and the
investigating officer were different.
11. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused that the ownership of the motor cycle
(vehicle) has not been established and proved and/or that the vehicle has not be recovered is
concerned, it is required to be noted that in the present case the appellant and the other accused
persons were found on the spot with the contraband articles in the vehicle. To prove the case under
the NDPS Act, the ownership of the vehicle is not required to be established and proved. It is enough
to establish and prove that the contraband articles were found from the accused from the vehicle
purchased by the accused. Ownership of the vehicle is immaterial. What is required to be
established and proved is the recovery of the contraband articles and the commission of an offence
under the NDPS Act? Therefore, merely because of the ownership of the vehicle is not established
and proved and/or the vehicle is not recovered subsequently, trial is not vitiated, while the
prosecution has been successful in proving and establishing the recovery of the contraband articles
from the accused on the spot.
12. Now so far as the prayer on behalf of the accused to take a lenient view and to impose the lesser
punishment than the sentence imposed by the learned Special Court, confirmed by the High Court,
is concerned, considering the object and purpose of the enactment of the NDPS Act and the fact that
the sentence provided under the Act for the offence in question is rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to 10 years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and the Court has
imposed sentence of five years rigorous imprisonment only, the prayer to take a lenient view is
rejected as the learned Special Court itself has taken a lenient view.
13. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, we are of the firm view that both the courts
below have rightly convicted the accused for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the NDPS Act.
We are in complete agreement with the findings recorded by the learned Special Court and
confirmed by the High Court and the conviction recorded by both the courts below. We see no
reason to interfere with the conviction of the accused for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of
the NDPS Act. In the circumstances, the present appeal fails and the same deserves to be dismissed
and is accordingly dismissed.
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
7

                                   ……………………………….J.
                                   [ASHOK BHUSHAN]
                                   ……………………………….J.
                                   [R. SUBHASH REDDY]
NEW DELHI;                         ……………………………….J.
SEPTEMBER 10, 2020.                [M.R. SHAH]
Rizwan Khan vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 10 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96697417/
8
