Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3417, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
217, (2020) 3 SCALE 395
Author: Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench: R. Subhash Reddy, Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
                                                               REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1443-1456 OF 2020
                 (@ Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) Nos.13714-13727 of
                                        2015)
           Sakkubai Etc. Etc.                               ….Appellant(s)
                                               Versus
           State of Karnataka & Ors. Etc. Etc.              ….Respondent(s)
                                               WITH
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1457 OF 2020
                      (@ Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.15203 of 2015)
                                               AND
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1459 OF 2020
                      (@ Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 4080 OF 2020)
                             (Arising out of Diary No. 1942 of 2018)
                                           J UD G M E NT
           MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1. Leave granted.
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
1

2. The instant appeals arise out of the common final judgment and order dated 27.04.2015 passed
by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in W.P. Nos. 60278, 60279, 60280, 60304-60315 of
2011. Vide the impugned order, the High Court dismissed the writ petitions seeking a direction to
the Respondent-authorities to restrain them from demolishing the restaurants and guest houses run
by the writ petitioners in Virupapura Gaddi, Koppal district, Karnataka.
3. The background to this appeal is as follows:
3.1 With the object of ensuring the preservation of ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains in the erstwhile State of Mysore, the Mysore Ancient
and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1961
(hereinafter ‘the 1961 Act’) was enacted. Under this statute, the State Government
was accorded the power to declare certain ancient monuments as ‘protected
monuments’ and certain archaeological sites and remains as ‘protected areas’.
Accordingly, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 19(1) of the 1961 Act, the State Government
issued a (preliminary) notification on 19.05.1982 for declaration of certain archaeological sites and
remains specified in the schedule thereto as ‘protected areas’. Subsequently, on 22.10.1988, a (final)
notification was issued under Section 19(3) of the 1961 Act declaring ten villages, including
Virupapura Gaddi, as ‘protected areas’ (hereinafter ‘the 1988 notification’). 3.2 It is the case of the
Appellants that they own land(s) in Virupapura Gaddi, an oval islet formed by the Tungabhadra
river, located on the west of the Hampi World Heritage site. The Appellants claim that during the
period from 1990-2000, given the increasing number of tourists visiting Virapupura Gaddi, they
obtained hotel/restaurant licenses from the village panchayat to cater to the needs of the tourists. In
certain instances, they also obtained diversion orders from the local authorities for changing the
land use from agricultural to non- agricultural, so that they could run hotels, restaurants, and guest
houses in their premises.
3.3 However, upon the introduction of the Hampi World Heritage Area Management Authority Act,
2002 ( hereinafter ‘the Hampi Act’), the authority constituted thereunder, the Hampi World
Heritage Area Management Authority ( hereinafter ‘HWHAMA’), Respondent No. 4 herein, directed
the panchayats and local authorities not to renew any licenses and not to grant permission for
commercial activities within Virupapura Gaddi. Later, in exercise of its powers under the Hampi
Act, the HWHAMA issued notices to the Appellants for demolishing the structures constructed by
them. To restrain them from doing so, the Appellants herein filed writ petitions before the High
Court, seeking the identical relief of a direction to HWHAMA to forbear from carrying out such
demolition. 3.4 Vide the impugned judgment dated 27.04.2015, the High Court of Karnataka
dismissed these writ petitions. The High Court found that the 1988 notification declared the entire
village of Virupapura Gaddi as protected area. As a result, Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act came into
operation, rendering the land there usable for the purposes of cultivation only, unless otherwise
approved by the State Government. Thus, given that the writ petitioners had constructed rooms,
thatched roof huts, temporary structures, and buildings to carry on the business of hotels,
restaurants, or guesthouses in Virupapura Gaddi, it was held that such construction was in violation
of the 1961 Act. It was also observed that the panchayats did not have any authority to accord
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
2

sanction to the building plans, as such power was solely vested with the State Government under
Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act. Furthermore, it was noted that Virupapura Gaddi fell in the ‘core zone’
of the heritage area specified under the Hampi Act, and was therefore subject to the authority of the
HWHAMA. Hence, in light of the illegality of the constructions under the 1988 notification, the
HWHAMA could demolish the structures erected by the Appellants. It is against this common
judgment and order that the Appellants have come in appeal before this Court.
4. Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
5. Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Shekhar Naphade, representing some of the Appellants, argued that
the entire village of Virupapura Gaddi cannot be construed as ‘protected area’ under Section 19 of
the 1961 Act. This is because the scope of this provision is limited to archaeological site and remains,
and it does contemplate the declaration of entire village(s) as protected area(s). Drawing our
attention to the definitions of the terms “ancient monuments” and “archaeological site and remains”
under Sections 2(1) and 2(3) of the 1961 Act respectively, he submitted that the two terms should be
read in conjunction with each other, such that the conception of “archaeological site and remains”
cannot be divorced from the existence of “ancient monuments”. In light of this, stating that there are
no monuments in Virupapura Gaddi, he argued that there could not be any “archaeological remains”
as well, for it to be declared as ‘protected area’ under Section
19. Thus, the constructions in question were not hit by the 1988 notification.
In any case, even if the entire village was considered to be ‘protected area’ under the 1988
notification, he contended that the HWHAMA did not have any authority to demolish the structures
raised by the Appellants for two reasons – first, the HWHAMA was an authority established under
the Hampi Act, which is a legislation that is independent of the 1961 Act. Thus, even if the
constructions fell foul of Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act on account of the land being used for
non-cultivable purpose, Section 20(2), which gives the Deputy Commissioner the power to order
removal of such construction, should have been resorted to. In the absence of such action by the
particular authority envisaged under the 1961 Act, i.e. the Deputy Commissioner, it was contended
that the HWHAMA could not have proceeded with the demolition. Secondly, it was submitted that
since the construction was carried out by the Appellants prior to the coming into force of the Hampi
Act, the HWHAMA could not have acted in relation to them, as its power to control development in
heritage areas under Section 14 is prospective in nature. In any case, such powers could have been
exercised only upon the issuance of a notification under Section 14(1), which was not done in the
present case. Thus, the Appellants submitted that their businesses were being run legally after
obtaining the relevant licenses from the local bodies, and the construction in question was being
wrongfully demolished by the HWHAMA.
6. Supporting these contentions, learned Senior Counsels, Mr. Basava Prabhu S. Patil and Mr. Guru
Krishna Kumar representing the other Appellants, drew our attention to a challenge to the 1988
notification, which is currently pending before the High Court of Karnataka. In light of this, they
prayed that the buildings of the Appellants not be demolished before the final decision is rendered
by the High Court. On merits, it was argued that the impugned order was without reasons and
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
3

proceeded on unsubstantiated assumptions, especially with respect to findings on illegality of
conversion orders granted by the local authorities.
7. Per contra, learned Senior Counsel Mr. P.S. Narasimha, appearing for HWHAMA (Respondent
No. 4 herein) argued that the entire village of Virupapura Gaddi falls within the ‘protected area’
declared by the State Government in the 1988 notification. To substantiate the same, he referred us
to Column 5 of the Schedule to this notification, and Map ‘A’ annexed thereto, both of which make it
sufficiently clear that the entire village of Virupapura Gaddi is included within the boundaries of the
protected area.
Further, he submitted that the scheme of the 1961 Act is such that ‘protected areas’ constitute a
category separate from ‘protected monuments’. Therefore, it is possible for certain areas to be
protected independent of the existence of monuments, if there is a reasonable belief that they
contain ruins or relics of historical or archaeological importance. In light of this, he drew upon
materials indicating the archaeological significance of Virupapura Gaddi, and submitted that the
1988 notification was justifiably made applicable to the entire village. Based on this, he contended
that the land in the area could only be used for cultivation purposes as per the proviso to Section
20(1) of the 1961 Act. Since the Appellants were carrying out commercial activities there, the
structures raised by them were argued as being in violation of the 1961 Act. As regards the
jurisdiction of the HWHAMA to direct the demolition of such constructions, learned Senior Counsel
argued that even though the HWHAMA is an authority under a subsequent legislation, the regimes
of the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act should not be viewed as strictly separate compartments. Drawing
upon the context in which the Hampi Act was introduced, he submitted that it should not be seen as
being divorced from the 1961 Act, but in furtherance of it. To substantiate this, he indicated that the
Hampi Act effectively incorporates the 1988 notification issued under the 1961 Act by denoting the
protected area declared under the notification as the ‘core area zone’ under it. Further, he alluded to
the current restrictions and prohibitions applicable to core area zones as well as the Zonal
Regulations framed under the Master Plan 2021 to argue that the restrictions on Virupapura Gaddi
under the Hampi Act are co-terminus with the restrictions imposed on the area under the 1988
notification. In light of this, it was contended that the regimes under the two statutes should not be
treated as silos and the HWHAMA had the authority to enforce the 1988 notification issued under
the 1961 Act. Lastly, with regards to Section 14 of the Hampi Act, it was submitted that it is only an
overarching provision that allows for the issuance of a further notification to control development in
the heritage area. In other words, the lack of a notification under Section 14(1) does not render a
prior notification intended for the same purpose meaningless or unenforceable by the HWHAMA.
In fact, in view of the functions delineated for the HWHAMA under Section 11 of the Hampi Act, he
argued that the authority was right in proceeding against the illegal constructions as part of its duty
to protect property within the heritage area.
8. The contentions raised by Mr. Narasimha were adopted by learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Devdatt
Kamat, representing the Government of Karnataka, Respondent No. 1 herein.
9. Upon perusing the material on record and in light of the arguments advanced by the parties, the
following issues arise for our consideration in this appeal–
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
4

(i) Whether the construction raised by the Appellants was lawful under the 1961 Act, in light of the
1988 notification?
(ii) If not, whether the HWHAMA had authority to demolish the said constructions?
10. Before we delve into these issues, it would be appropriate to consider the preliminary objection
raised by the Appellants with respect to hearing of the instant appeal, in light of a pending challenge
to the Hampi Act and the 1988 notification.
10.1 The Hampi Act is said to be under challenge before the High Court. Vide I.A. No. 58525 of 2017
filed in the underlying SLP, the Appellants sought permission to amend the SLP seeking a
declaration that the 1988 notification is ultra vires the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and
Historical Sites and Remains Act, 1958, the 1961 Act, as well as the Hampi Act. While disposing off
the said application, this Court observed thus:
“It may be pertinent to mention here that the petitioners have already filed a writ
petition before the Karnataka High Court being Writ Petition Nos. 65940-65949 of
2011 in which the petitioners submit that the Hampi World Heritage Management
Authority Act 2002 is arbitrary, illegal, ultra vires and unconstitutional as stated
supra. There is conflict of provisions of different Acts viz., Karnataka Ancient and
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1961, the Ancient
Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Hampi World
Heritage Authority Management Act 2002 and also Master plan 2012. Thus, it is
necessary to stay the operation of the Hampi World Heritage Authority Management
Act, 2002 and Master Plan 2021 pending disposal of the writ petition. If the Act is not
stayed, there will be multiplicity of litigations.
As the matter is still pending before the Karnataka High Court, we, therefore, do not
find it proper to allow the application for amendment of SLP. It is hereby rejected.
However, if the petitioners want to challenge the said Notification, they may do it
either by amending the petition pending before the Karnataka High Court or by filing
a fresh petition before the High Court as per law.” 10.2 From the above, it is clear that
though the petition challenging the Hampi Act was filed in the year 2011, the same
has not been pursued by the Appellant before the High Court.
Be that as it may, nothing has been placed on record by the Appellants to show that operation of the
1988 notification or the Hampi Act has been stayed. In the absence of any such interim order
staying the operation of the said notification or the Hampi Act, it is not open for the Appellants to
use the same to argue for a deferral of the hearing of the instant appeals till the disposal of W.P. Nos.
65940-65949 of 2011 by the High Court. Accordingly, we reject the prayer made by the Appellants
for deferring the matter till the disposal of the writ petitions pending before the High Court.
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
5

11. In light of this, we now proceed to examine the issues arising for our consideration in the instant
appeals. Re: First Issue
12. The first issue pertains to the validity of the development undertaken by the Appellants under
the 1961 Act. In this context, it would be useful to refer to certain relevant provisions of the Act:
“Section 2. Definitions.— (1) “ancient monument” means any structure, erection or
monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture,
inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and
which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years, and includes –
(i) the remains of an ancient monument,
(ii) the site of an ancient monument,
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument, and
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient monument;
but shall not include ancient and historical monuments declared by or under law made by
Parliament to be of national importance;
xxx (3) “archaeological site and remains” means any area which contains or is reasonably believed to
contain ruins or relics of historical or archaeological importance which have been in existence for
not less than one hundred years, and includes—
(i) such portion of land adjoining the area as may be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise
preserving it, and
(ii) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of the area;
xxx (9) “protected area” means any archaeological site and remains which is declared to be
protected under this Act;
xxx Section 4: Power of Government to declare ancient monuments to be protected monuments.—
(1) Where the Government is of opinion that any ancient monument should be declared as a
protected monument, it may, by notification in the official Gazette, give two months’ notice of its
intention to declare such ancient monument to be a protected monument and a copy of every such
notification shall be affixed in a conspicuous place near the monument.
(2) Any person interested in any such ancient monument may within two months after the issue of
the notification, object to the declaration of the monument to be a protected monument.
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
6

(3) On the expiry of the said period of two months, the Government may, after considering the
objections, if any, received by it, declare by notification in the Official Gazette the ancient
monument to be a protected monument.
(4) A notification published under sub-section (3) shall, unless and until it is withdrawn, be
conclusive evidence of the fact that the ancient monument to which it relates is a protected
monument for the purposes of this Act.
xxx Section 19: Power of Government to declare archaeological site and remains to be protected
area.— (1) Where the Government is of opinion that any archaeological site and remains should be
declared as a protected area, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, give two months’ notice
of its intention to declare such archaeological site and remains to be a protected area, and a copy of
every such notification shall be affixed in a conspicuous place near the site and remains.
(2) Any person interested in any such archaeological site and remains may, within two months after
the issue of the notification, object to the declaration of the archaeological site and remains to be
protected area.
(3) On the expiry of the said period of two months, the Government may, after considering the
objections, if any, received by it, declare by notification in the Official Gazette, the archaeological
site and remains to be a protected area.
(4) A notification published under sub-section (3) shall, unless and until it is withdrawn, be
conclusive evidence of the fact that the archaeological site and remains to which it relates is a
protected area for the purposes of this Act.”
13. In the instant case, exercising its powers under Section 19(3) of the 1961 Act, the State
Government issued the 1988 notification declaring certain areas specified in the Schedule thereto as
protected areas. From a perusal of this Schedule, it is amply clear that “Virupapura Gaddi” had been
indicated in Column 5 as a covered area. Further, Map ‘A’ which is annexed to this Schedule also
makes it evident that the entire village of Virupapura Gaddi was included within the boundaries of
the protected areas. In fact, the specific Survey Nos. of lands where the Appellants are carrying on
their restaurants and guesthouses are also mentioned in this Map. Thus, there is no doubt that the
1988 notification clearly indicates the entire village of Virupapura Gaddi as a protected zone.
14. As to whether the entire village could be declared as protected area by the 1988 notification, we
do not find merit in the Appellants’ argument that a notification under Section 19 of the 1961 Act
only contemplates protection for archaeological site and remains that are linked to the existence of
monuments.
14.1 In our opinion, the 1961 Act makes two distinct categories for protected monuments ( see
Sections 3 to 18) and protected areas (see Section 19 onwards). While the former relates to “ancient
monuments”, the latter relates to “archaeological site and remains”. Upon a close reading of the 1961
Act, we find that there is nothing in the definitions under Sections 2(1) and 2(3) or otherwise under
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
7

the scheme of the 1961 Act, that indicates a link between the existence of “archaeological site and
remains” and “ancient monuments”. It cannot be said that the protection ascribed to archaeological
site and remains must necessarily depend on the existence of a monument. It is possible for certain
areas to be protected independent of the existence of monuments, if there is a reasonable belief that
they contain ruins or relics of historical or archaeological importance [see Section 2(3) supra]. 14.2
In light of this, when we look to the village of Virupapura Gaddi specifically, there appears to be
sufficient material to establish its archaeological significance. The Archaeological Survey of India
(ASI), Respondent No.5 herein, has in fact highlighted the archaeological importance of Virupapura
Gaddi in its Statement of Objections filed before the High Court as under:
“2. LOCATION OF VIRUPAPURA GUDDA AND ITS IMPORTANCE xxx 2.1
Virupapura Gudda is an oval islet formed by the river Tungahbhadra flowing towards
the northern perimeter of Hampi World Heritage site. The river flowing in east-west
direction has many small islets of which the above is the largest measuring nearly
2,600 mtrs east-west and 1,300 mtrs north-south.
The islet in the centre throughout its east-west length is characterized by undulated low hillock of
granite and the highest altitude is 1,570 feet. The southern, western and northern part is put to
cultivation.
xxx
3. Important Archaeological remains close to Virupapura Gadda
1. Sri Virupaksha Temple and the Hampi ruins: This is in Regulated zone and 200 mtrs; from the
south eastern extreme of Virupapuragadda to the fort wall to the north of Virupaksha Temple
complex.
2. Kodandarama Temple: This is in Regulated zone and 165.68 mtrs from State protected; from the
south eastern extreme of Virupapuragadda to the Temple.
3. Varaha Temple: This is centrally protected monument and 249.00 mtrs; from the south eastern
extreme of Virupapuragadda to the Temple.
4. Koti Linga: This is a State protected monument and 190.58 mtrs from the southern extreme of
Virupapuragadda to the parent rock formation where the Kotilinga is situated.
5. Western fort wall – Vithala Temple Complex: This is centrally protected monument and 229.40
mtrs from Regulated zone to the island.
6. Purandara mandapa: This is State protected monument and 150.59 mtrs from Regulated zone to
the island.
7. Ancient path: This is nearly 121 mtrs; State protected monument and this is a Regulated zone.
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
8

xxx Pre and proto-history of the Place-Virupapura Gadda
4. The hillock of Virupapura Gudda is identified traditionally as the kishkinda of Ramayana fame
and has the attachment of the sentiment as the sacred site of Sri Ramachandra.
4.1 The heaps of granite boulders are the home of many natural rock shelters, which have proven to
be the safe habitation of Proto historic man who as a wander used these shelters to start with before
settling down into the hutments of makeshift shelters he built or him…The geomorphology of the
place even today breathes a prehistoric atmosphere. This is so because of the natural habitat, the
meandering river Tungabhadra offering little open grass lands with scrubby jungle harboring games
for sustenance and building hutments for living during condusive climate. The huge rock shelters
offered resting place perhaps during rainy season. The slope of the hillocks of the swarm of dyke
formation at Virupapura Gudda offered requisite glade for the pre historic man. This remarkable
integration of man-made and natural setting, vivid in the myriad facets, viz. art and architecture,
socio-cultural, economical, administrative, defence organization and natural resource management,
together enabled the establishment of this grand metropolis.
xxx
8. PROVISIONS IN THE INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT PLAN
1. This island is an important archaeological site, which formed an access point from the North, i.e.
from Virupaksha Temple and Tungabhadra River Bank. The ancient access path from the main land
to the island leading from the northern point can be observed when the water level is low in the river
and during the months of summer, the same path way is in use. Otherwise when the river flows with
full of water, to have the access the same route is used by the boatmen to take the people to the
island. Hence, the site is of great archaeological importance…” 14.3 From these observations by the
ASI, a specialized body responsible for archaeological research and conservation of cultural
monuments in India, there remains little doubt as to the historical importance of Virupapura Gaddi.
It appears that the Government had considered the comprehensive geographical entity of the area,
including attributes like its landscape, prehistoric vestiges and water systems. Thus, the 1988
notification issued under Section 19(3) of the 1961 Act declaring Virupapura Gaddi as a protected
area cannot be said to be without basis. Further, Section 19(4) of the 1961 Act clarifies that the
notification issued under Section 19(3) conclusively establishes the status of Virupapura Gaddi as
protected area under the said Act.
15. In light of this, we now proceed to consider the effect of the 1988 notification on the
constructions raised by the Appellants during the period between 1991-2000. In this regard, Section
20 of the 1961 Act is relevant:
“Section 20: Restrictions on enjoyment of property rights in protected areas.— (1) No
person, including the owner or occupier of a protected area, shall construct any
building within the protected area or carry on any mining, quarrying, excavating,
blasting or any operation of a like nature in such area, or utilise such area or any part
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
9

thereof in any other manner without the permission of the Government:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of any
such area or part thereof for purposes of cultivation if such cultivation does not
involve the digging of not more than one foot of soil from the surface.
(2) The Government may, by order, direct that any building constructed by any
person within a protected area in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall be removed within a specified period and, if the person refuses or fails to
comply with the order, the Deputy Commissioner may cause the building to be
removed and the person shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal.” From a
reading of sub-section (1) of Section 20, it is evident that owners/occupiers of
protected areas cannot construct any building or utilize such areas in any manner
other than cultivation, without the permission of the State Government.
16. Here, since the entire area comprising Virupapura Gaddi had been declared as protected area
vide the 1988 notification, it follows that the land owned by the Appellants could have only been
used for the purpose of cultivation after the issuance of such notification. However, as mentioned
supra, the Appellants had constructed huts and buildings on their lands for the commercial purpose
of running hotels, restaurants, and guest houses. Clearly then, these constructions were in violation
of Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act.
17. Furthermore, the permissions/licenses obtained by the Appellants from the local panchayat were
issued without any authority, as Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act makes the State Government the
appropriate authority for granting permissions for non-cultivable use of protected areas. Thus, the
licenses issued by the panchayat cannot but be said to be illegal.
18. In view of the foregoing discussion, we find that by virtue of the 1988 notification declaring the
entire village of Virupapura Gaddi as a protected area, the restrictions on construction and use
under Section 20(1) came into operation with effect from 22.10.1988 itself. Thus, the construction
carried out by the Appellants on their lands at Virupapura Gaddi for commercial purposes was in
violation of the 1961 Act. Re: Second Issue
19. The second issue pertains to whether the HWHAMA could have proceeded to demolish these
illegal constructions.
20. In this regard, as mentioned supra, the Appellants have argued that the HWHAMA, which is a
body set up under the Hampi Act, could not have issued such orders for demolition as the illegality
of the constructions (if any) was rooted in the 1961 Act. At its very core, we find that this issue
relates to the interplay between the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act. Thus, before delving into the
relevant legal provisions, we deem it fit to appreciate the objects underlying these statutes and the
contexts in which they were enacted. 20.1 As mentioned supra, the 1961 Act was introduced with the
object of ensuring the preservation of ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains in
Karnataka. In pursuance of the same, the 1988 notification was issued under Section 19(3) declaring
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
10

certain areas in Hampi as ‘protected areas’.
20.2 Notably, in 1989, the group of monuments at Hampi were inscribed in the list of “World
Heritage sites” declared by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation
(hereinafter ‘UNESCO’). The UNESCO is a specialized agency of the United Nations and inter alia its
objective is to encourage the identification, protection, and preservation of cultural and natural
heritage around the world considered to be of outstanding value to humanity. In pursuance of the
same, the UNESCO Conference adopted the Convention concerning the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage in 1972,1 emphasizing the obligation of State parties to take necessary
measures for the conservation and protection of world heritage properties.
Specifically, the recognition of the monuments at Hampi as a World Heritage site was based on the
fulfilment of the following points of the 10-point criteria stipulated by UNESCO:
India ratified this Convention in the year 1977.
Criterion (i)- to represent a masterpiece of human creative genius: The remarkable
integration between the planned and defended city of Hampi with its exemplary
temple architecture and its spectacular natural setting represent a unique artistic
creation.
Criterion (iii)- to bear unique or at least exceptional testimony to a cultural tradition
or to a civilization which is living or which has disappeared: The city bears
exceptional testimony to the vanished civilization of the kingdom of Vijayanagara,
which reached its apogee under the reign of Krishna Deva Raya (1509-1530).
Criterion (iv)- to be an outstanding example of a type of building, architectural or
technological ensemble or landscape which illustrates (a) significant stage(s) in
human history: This capital offers an outstanding example of a type of structure
which illustrates a significant historical situation: that of the destruction of the
Vijayanagara kingdom at the Battle of Talikota (1565 CE) which left behind an
ensemble of living temples, magnificent archaeological remains in the form of
elaborate sacred, royal, civil and military structures as well as traces of its rich
lifestyle, all integrated within its natural setting.2 From the above, it is evident that
the recognition of Hampi as a World Heritage site was a testament to its immense
The Criteria for Selection to be included on the World Heritage List, available at
https://whc.unesco.org/en/criteria/; The Description of Group of Monuments at
H a m p i ,  U N E S C O  W o r l d  H e r i t a g e  L i s t ,  a v a i l a b l e  a t
https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/241.
historical importance. It was also a crucial milestone in the efforts to preserve and protect the
Hampi monuments, as it paved way for India to access the annual World Heritage Fund of US$ 4
million earmarked by the UNESCO for the upkeep of World Heritage sites.
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
11

20.3 Soon after such recognition, as the number of tourists visiting Hampi increased, concerns
began being raised about uncontrolled construction, haphazard development, and other illegal
activities carried out in the garb of catering to tourists. In light of these developments, the UNESCO
classified the Hampi World Heritage properties as being ‘in danger’ in 1999. This classification was
significant inasmuch as it reflected the deteriorating condition of the area. Notably, the Hampi
World Heritage properties continued to be classified as such till 2006.
20.4 In view of such changes and its obligations under international conventions, the Government
of Karnataka felt it necessary to create a body that would streamline the development in the Hampi
region. However, till the time that a specific statute was enacted for such purpose, the HWHAMA
was constituted as an interim authority vide a Government Order dated 21.03.2002. The Preamble
to this order is notable:
“Preamble: Hampi has been declared as a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO and
the Government of India has recently announced that Hampi would be developed as
an international destination centre. There is a need for proper management and
development of Hampi World Heritage Area in order to conserve and preserve the
rich heritage in this area and at the same time develop the area for providing good
facilities for both national and international tourists. Thus all the activities in the
Hampi World Heritage Area need to be regulated and coordinated in order to provide
facilities and at the same time ensure proper conservation of the heritage. There is a
need for a statutory body regulating on the issues pertaining to the management and
development aspects in the Hampi World Heritage Area. The Government is
contemplating a legislation constituting Hampi World Heritage Area Management
Authority. In the interregnum, there is an immediate need to have an interim body to
promote coordinated development of the heritage area. Thus the Hampi World
Heritage Area Management Authority and the State Level Advisory Committee are
being constituted through an executive order to manage the affairs of Hampi till the
statutory bodies come into effect.” 20.5 Subsequently, the State Government enacted
a specific legislation for the conservation of the cultural heritage of Hampi, i.e. the
Hampi Act. This Act was brought into force with effect from 27.01.2005, and the
HWHAMA was constituted under Section 3 thereof. Until such time, the interim
authority constituted vide Government Order dated 21.03.2002, mentioned supra,
continued. The overall object of the Hampi Act can be gleaned from its Preamble,
which reads as follows:
“An Act to provide for conservation of the cultural heritage of Hampi with all its
archeological remains and natural environs; to preserve its cultural identity and to
ensure sustainable development of the Hampi World Heritage Area, in the State of
Karnataka and to constitute Hampi World Heritage Area Management Authority.
Whereas it is expedient to provide for,-
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
12

(a) the conservation of the Cultural Heritage and natural environs of Hampi and its
surroundings;
(b) the preservation of the historical and cultural identity of Hampi as a World
Heritage Centre;
(c) preventing uncontrolled development and commercial exploitation of the area;
(d) sustained development of the area which is conducive to the above objectives, and
(e) for matters incidental thereto…” 20.6 A close reading of the Preamble to the
Hampi Act reveals an underlying common object between the 1961 Act and the
Hampi Act– providing for the preservation of the respective monuments and areas
protected under these legislations. The difference is that the 1961 Act was enacted as
a broader legislation covering the entire State of Karnataka, while the Hampi Act was
enacted with a specific focus on the heritage site of Hampi, keeping in mind the
international recognition that had been accorded to it.
20.7 In addition to such common object, certain other provisions of the Hampi Act also indicate a
continuity between the legal regimes of the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act. For instance, the Hampi
Act directly incorporates the 1988 notification issued under Section 19(3) of the 1961 Act, while
demarcating the Hampi heritage area in its Schedule. “Heritage area” has been defined as follows
under the Hampi Act:
“Section 2: Definitions.- (1) In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,-… …(l)
“Heritage Area” means the whole of the area comprising the Core Area Zone, Buffer
Zone and Peripheral Zones, but excluding the area referred to as protected area
under the Ancient Monuments and Historical sites and Remains Act, 1958 (Central
Act 24 of 1958);” Parts A, B, and C of Schedule I to the Hampi Act respectively
indicate the extent of the core area zone, buffer zone and peripheral zone forming
part of the Hampi heritage area. Under Part A, which indicates the extent of the core
area zone, there is a clear reference to the area of 41.80 sq kms declared to be
protected area under the 1988 notification.
20.8 Furthermore, even the applicable restrictions under the Master Plan 2021
prepared under the Hampi Act are similar to those imposed by virtue of the 1988
notification, inasmuch as no development of Virupapura Gaddi is permissible. The
Master Plan 2021 came into force on 10.07.2008. It stipulates the formation of
development schemes for towns and villages included within the Hampi local
planning area. Though it did not provide for a specific development plan for
Virupapura Gaddi, it provides Zonal Regulations for areas under special control,
which include river islands, tank beds et al. Regulation 2(f) of these Zonal
regulations, which deals with such areas of special control is relevant here:
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
13

“(f) No development is permitted in eco-sensitive areas like river islands, tank bed
areas, rocky outcrop, hillocks, and forest areas.” In light of this, given that
Virupapura Gaddi is a river island, it is evident that no development is permissible
there even per the Master Plan 2021 prepared under the Hampi Act.
When juxtaposed with the restrictions under Section 20(1) of the 1961 Act, this also
indicates a continuity between the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act.
21. In view of the foregoing factors, we do not find merit in the Appellants’ argument that the Hampi
Act is purely prospective in nature and that the HWHAMA, which has been established under such
Act, cannot enforce prior notifications. In our considered opinion, the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act
cannot be viewed as separate, watertight compartments that operate independent of each other.
Such an understanding would not only defeat their underlying common objective, but also belie the
events leading up to the enactment of the Hampi Act, all of which clearly reflect that the Hampi Act
was a culmination of continuing attempts by the State Government to preserve and protect the
cultural heritage of Hampi. Therefore, the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act must not be construed as
isolated silos. Since they both seek to fulfill a common object, they must be interpreted in a manner
that seeks to further such objective, and not obstruct it.
22. In the present case, since it is established that the structures erected by the Appellants were in
violation of the 1961 Act, given the common thread underlying the 1961 Act and the Hampi Act, it
cannot be said that such illegality ceased to exist when the Hampi Act came into force. Thus, the
HWHAMA was, and is entitled to proceed against the development raised by the Appellants, which
had been rendered illegal under the prior legislation.
23. It may also be useful to appreciate the background in which the HWHAMA had proceeded to
take action against the Appellants. As mentioned supra, the Hampi World Heritage properties had
been included in the ‘in danger’ list by UNESCO in 1999. However, owing to serious efforts by the
State Government and the HWHAMA, this classification was dropped in 2006. The threat to the
various monuments and the integrity of the landscape of Hampi, however, continued. This is well
reflected in the resolution of the 33rd meeting of the World Heritage Committee of UNESCO in
2009, wherein rampant illegal constructions in the village of Virupapura Gaddi, found a specific
mention:
“…The World Heritage Committee,
1. xxx
2. xxx
3. xxx
4. xxx
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
14

5. xxx
6. xxx
7. Expresses its concern over illegal constructions and other developments, such as
social housing projects, within the extended boundaries which are being considered
for the possible extension of the property, particularly in Virupapura Gada island and
Hampi villlages, which appear to have a negative impact on the integrity of the
landscape….” Similar concerns were also raised at the 34 th meeting of the UNESCO
World Heritage Committee in 2010.
24. It was in the context of these developments that the HWHAMA had directed the local authorities
to not renew the trade licenses issued to the Appellants, and later proceeded to issue notices for
demolishing the constructions raised by the Appellants. In view of the broad ranging functions
envisaged for the HWHAMA under Section 11 of the Hampi Act, we find that its actions were lawful,
as it was incumbent upon the authority to act and not turn a blind eye to the illegality being
perpetrated by the Appellants.
25. Finally, we advert to the claim of the Appellants that the lack of a notification under Section
14(1) of the Hampi Act fettered the powers of the HWHAMA to take action against them. It may be
useful to refer to Section 14 in this regard:
“Section 14: No other authority or person to undertake development without
permission of the Authority.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, except
with the previous permission of the Authority, no other authority or person shall
undertake any development within the Heritage Area, of the types as the Authority
may from time to time specify by notification published in the Official Gazette.
(2) No local authority shall grant permission for any development referred to in
sub-section (1), within the Heritage Area, unless the Authority has granted
permission for such development.
(3) Any authority or person desiring to undertake development referred to in
sub-section (1) shall apply in writing to the Authority for permission to undertake
such development.
(4) The Authority may, after making such inquiry as it deems necessary grant such
permission without or with such conditions, as it may deem fit, to impose or refuse to
grant such permission.
(5) Any authority or person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority under
sub-section (4) may, within thirty days from the date of the decision appeal against
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
15

such decision to the State Government, whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that, where the aggrieved authority submitting such appeal is under the
administrative control of the Central Government, the appeal shall be decided by the
State Government, after consultation with the Central Government. (6) In case any
person or authority does anything contrary to the decision given under sub-section
(4) as modified in sub-section (5), the Authority shall have power to pull down,
demolish or remove any development under taken contrary to such decision and
recover the cost of such pulling down, demolition or removal from the person or
authority concerned.” Evidently, under Section 14(1), the HWHAMA is made the sole
authority for undertaking development in the heritage area of such types as it may
specify by a notification.
25.1 Though the Appellants have contended that such a notification under Section 14(1) is a
pre-condition for the HWHAMA to exercise its powers to order demolition under Section 14(6), we
are not inclined to accept such an argument. In view of the co-terminus legislative scheme of the
1961 Act and the Hampi Act, we find that Section 14 of the Hampi Act acts as an overarching
provision that enables the issuance of a further notification to control development in the Hampi
heritage area. This, however, does not mean that the lack of a notification under Section 14(1)
renders a prior notification intended for the same purpose unenforceable, as is the case with the
1988 notification here.
25.2 In any case, we find that the notification dated 10.07.2008 regarding the implementation of the
Master Plan 2021 and the Zonal Regulations fulfils the requirement of Section 14(1) in the present
case, as they clearly specify the restrictions as to land use and the prohibited types of development.
Thus, the Appellants cannot use the absence of regulation of Virupapura Gaddi as a ground to justify
the illegal construction on their land.
26. In light of the foregoing discussion, we conclude that the construction of rooms, thatched roof
huts, temporary structures, and buildings by the Appellants to carry on the business of hotels,
restaurants, or guesthouses in Virupapura Gaddi was in violation of the 1961 Act. Further, it is held
that the HWHAMA had the authority to proceed with the demolition of such illegal constructions.
Thus, we do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned final judgment and order dated
27.04.2015 passed by the High Court of Karnataka.
27. In view of these findings, the Respondents shall proceed with the demolition of the illegal
structures erected by the Appellants in Virupapura Gaddi within a period of one month from the
date of this order. With such observations, the instant appeals stand dismissed. Ordered
accordingly.
… . . … … … … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J .  ( M O H A N  M .  S H A N T A N A G O U D A R )
.……………………………...............J. (R. SUBHASH REDDY) New Delhi;
February 11, 2020
Sakkubai Etc. Etc. vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95183907/
16
