Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 SUPREME COURT 691, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
872
Author: K.M. Joseph
Bench: Aniruddha Bose, K.M. Joseph, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1512-1513 OF 2017
          SANDEEP KUMAR AND OTHERS                               ...   APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS
          STATE OF UTTARAKHAND AND ANOTHER                       ... RESPONDENT(S)
                                            J U D G M E N T
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1. The appellants, who were charged with the offence punishable under Section 304B of the Indian
Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) stood acquitted of the said charge by learned sessions
judge, Haridwar.
However, in appeal carried by the complainant/respondent No.2 herein, the verdict of acquittal was
set aside and the appellants after conviction under section 304-B of IPC stand sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life.
2. We heard Siddharth Dave, learned senior counsel for the appellants. Shri Krishnam Mishra,
learned counsel for the first respondent-state and Shri Sanjay Kumar Dubey, learned counsel for the
second respondent.
3. On the basis of the complaint, by second respondent dated 23.01.2011 at 5.00 pm, an FIR was
lodged. This led to the appellants finally being charge sheeted for having committed the offence
under Section 304B of the IPC. Th e facts stated in the FIR read inter alia as follows:
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
1

The daughter of the second respondent was married to the first appellant on
10.12.2009. After few days of the marriage the appellants who are the husband,
father-in-law and mother-in-law of his deceased daughter started harassing her for
dowry. About one month ago, his daughter and son
-in-law came to his house and remained there for two days. On both these days his
son-in-law, namely, the first appellant demanded from him, his sons and sons’ wives
a sum of Rupees ten lakhs within 10 to 15 days for the construction of the house. The
second respondent expressed his inability. Thereafter, seeing tears of his daughter
who said that her parents must pay the amount otherwise they will kill her, she was
sent away after being consoled. Thereafter, his daughter is alleged to have phoned
him, his family and his relatives thereby informing them that her husband,
mother-in-law and father-in-law were torturing her for money and they are
provoking her to commit suicide. On 23.01.2011 at about 9.30 am, he received phone
call from his deceased daughter to come at Haridwar otherwise they will kill her on
that day. So, they went there. The dead body of the daughter was found in the car
given by them in marriage. The death of the daughter was caused by poison and the
appellants were responsible.
4. In the charge-sheet, it is, inter alia, stated that on the basis of investigation and evidence given by
the witnesses and the recovery of the material from the spot, which contains the vomiting of the
deceased and was cleaned by the accused, thus, on the basis of the evidence, offence under Section
304B was proved.
5. Before the trial Court, the prosecution examined 11 witnesses. The appellant examined four
witnesses DW 1 to DW 4. Some documents including FSL Report, were produced.
THE PROSECUTION EVIDENCE
6. PW1 is none other than the father of the deceased. He deposed, inter alia, as follows:
The appellants and other relatives had come before the marriage and they did not
make any demand of dowry from him. In the marriage they gave Alto Car but they
demanded Santro Car. He arranged for Santro car. He spent Rupees fifteen lakhs. At
the marriage there was no dispute. After the marriage when they came for meeting, at
that time also, there was no demand for dowry. The deceased got opportunity for
admission in B.Ed. before marriage. After marriage, these persons (the appellants)
asked to complete B.Ed. and the expense has to be borne by him. Thus, on appellants
wishes, he bore the expense. After one month the daughter came and the appellants
said that their marriage could have been arranged for 20-25 lakhs. Upon being
confronted with this, the appellants stated that the mistake has been committed and
they will not say such words. Thereafter, the deceased used to say in between that the
appellants are demanding ten lakhs. Before 3 to 4 months he received phone call
from deceased that the appellants are pressing her to take poison forcefully and
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
2

asking for ten lakhs. He made phone calls to the relative of the first appellant and
asked him to intervene. The middle man who arranged the marriage, was contacted
(Be it noted that the middle man is not examined). He has further deposed that upon
bringing these facts by them and the son (PW2) and asking as to why he should not
file complaint to the Police, the second appellant said that he will manage the Police
and again 1st appellant apologised. They all live together in one house. Again, about
one month ago, the first appellant came to his house along with deceased and he
started demanding ten lakhs for the construction of the house and said that they will
return the money. First appellant remained in the house for two days. Deceased also
told him to arrange the money otherwise the appellants will kill her. He pawned
ornaments of his wife and paid Rs. one lakh to his daughter and son-in-law. They
went back. On 23.01.2011, in the morning at 09.30 a.m., the fateful day, he received a
call from deceased asking him to come Haridwar otherwise the appellants will kill
her. He called his youngest daughter (PW4). She, on phoning, was told by sister of
Appellant No.1, that the condition of deceased was not good. She told the appellant’s
sister to take the deceased to hospital. They reached Haridwar where the deceased
lived at about 3.00 pm. The dead body of the deceased was lying in the Santro car. He
first made a call at number 100 which was received by the Police Station, Roorkee.
He also made phone call to the Police Station, Ranipur on the basis of the number
given by the police but the police had already reached the spot before him. At the
time of marriage, he has taken a loan of Rupees two lakhs from his PF account. PW 1
has four children and the deceased was the last one. In 2009, he was receiving
Rs.10,000/- after deduction. The first appellant is Software Engineer. He denies that
no demand was made. He does not know whether the second appellant got Rs.35
lakhs when he retired in July as General Technician in BHEL. The registration of the
Santro car stood in his name. He denies that he used to use Santro car for business
and used to give occasionally to his daughter and first appellant. He admits having
got the car released from the court. After the marriage he has gone 2-3 times to the
house of second appellant and stayed there. After the marriage of the deceased, he
and his family members used to talk to the deceased daughter. He is unable to say on
which date, month and year the deceased told him that the appellants are saying that
they were getting 20-25 lakhs in the marriage. Thereafter, he said that it was one year
after the marriage and in 2011 (It be noted that in chief examination, PW1 says that
the deceased told him about it one month after marriage). The deceased had told him
regarding the demand for money 5-6 months of her reaching her in-laws and during
this period, she had told him more than 10 times. He has never met Mahavir Singh.
He has not told that when the deceased told regarding taking of salfas (some kind of
poison). In 5 to 6 months, 10 phone calls came from the in-laws’ house. He is unable
to say whether the appellant has done medical examination of his daughter on
1.12.2010 from DW1-Dr. K.K. Agarwal, Haridwar and on 18.12.2010 got her X-ray
from Super Pathology, Shivalik Nagar, Haridwar and her investigation got done on
11.5.2010 or that she was got treated from Dr. Mamta Tyagi. He does not know that
the illness of his daughter was got treated from her parental house. The first
appellant was B.Tech. He denies that the first appellant informed him on 23.9.2011
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
3

that the condition of his daughter is not good. The suggestion is put that the phone
was switched off.
PW 1 states he does not know whether first appellant took his daughter to Satbadi
Hospital when her condition became serious. He further deposes to say he does not
know whether the first appellant took her from Satbadi Hospital to District Hospital
where she was treated. He does not know whether on the advice of District Hospital,
the first appellant took his daughter to Jolly Grant Hospital, BHEL. He admits that
on the date of incident, when he reached his daughter’s house, they did not ask from
the appellants as to how his daughter had died. The suggestion is put that Police had
come on the basis of information of the first appellant which was denied. He denies
that the marriage was performed without any dowry and in a simple manner. He
stated that the in-laws of his daughter were not present when he reached there.
7. PW 2 is the brother of the deceased. He stated that the appellants used to taunt his sister
regularly. Mother-in-law and father-in-law never give full food to his sister. Four months before the
incident the first appellant along with his sister asked for ten lakhs. He says after pawing the
ornaments of his wife he paid one lakh. He refers to the phone call of 23.1.2011 from the deceased.
He says from the perusal of the dead body it seemed his sister died due to poison. He is unable to
explain why the statement that his father has spent 15 lakhs during the marriage is not found in his
statement under Section 161 CrPC though he has mentioned it. Another omission marked is about
the statement imputed to the in-laws of his sister (appellant 2 and 3) that they used to ask for dowry
and that the marriage of their son could have taken place in rupees 20-25 lakhs. They have not made
any complaint against the appellants anywhere apart from the complaint made on the date of the
death. He had not talked on phone to his sister on 23.1.2011 nor her in-laws talked on that day. Even
though he had a mobile phone with him, no talks with sister and in- laws took place. While sitting in
the car during the 4-5 hours of journey, they talked only with sister near Roorkee. She had called.
Her voice was very low. From Roorkee it took about 1½ to 2 hours to reach Haridwar. His father
made a phone at 100 number from the car. Roorkee is about 100 kilometres from the house of PW2.
They were not invited when the second appellant retired from BHEL for the farewell function and
therefore none reached from their family (Be it noted that PW1 has categorically said that he was
invited for the party). He had good talks with the deceased. He does not remember the month, date
when the deceased told about the demand for Rs.10 lakhs but it was made in 2010. He says that his
sister has no such disease and therefore they did not take any treatment before marriage. The
suggestion is clearly put to him that the appellant had taken the deceased to three hospitals on
23.01.2011. When the phone from the deceased was received at Roorkee from there about 1½ to 2
hours was taken in reaching the house of the accused persons.
8. PW 3, a relative of PW 1 (brother-in-law) states that after demand for Rs. 10 lakhs and payment of
Rs.1 lakhs by PW1 also, there was demand and torture by the appellants. He has not seen any torture
of the deceased with his own eyes. Even after knowing about the harassment and torture by the
in-laws he has never gone to the house of the appellants either by himself or with PW1 or any other
person.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
4

9. PW4 is the sister of the deceased. She has said that the appellants 2 and 3 used to torture her for
money and they did not allow her to see television and asked her to bring television from their
parent’s house. She made a phone call at 10 am on 23.01.2011 which is answered by the sister of the
first appellant and she told that the condition of the deceased was bad and upon being asked to take
her to the hospital appellant’s sister said that till now they have not taken her to the hospital. She
says that she is the youngest. She has her mother. She said that before one month from her death,
the deceased has come to her house. The omission in her 161 statement about deceased telling her
parents about torture and demand for money is brought out. She reiterates this was mentioned to
the Police. Another omission which is noted is regarding the alleged statement made by her to the
Police that a phone call from PW1 (her father) that he has asked her to make a phone at the landline
number of the in-laws house of the deceased. She has never seen from her own eyes anybody beating
her sister. She further says she does not how the death of her sister occurred (Even though in chief
examination she has deposed that her sister was killed for the demand of dowry). She says her sister
was very sensitive. She says that the appellants committed murder of her sister and that they used to
demand dowry. The omission in her 161 statement about the appellant having murdered the
deceased is brought out. She denies that the appellants were present in the house when they reached
on 23.01.2011.
10. PW 5 is the doctor who conducted post mortem. He deposed that the body of the deceased was
stiff. Post Mortem was conducted on 24.01.2011 at 11.00 am. Therefore, the time of the incident was
within 24 hours. There was no mark of any injury on the dead body. All organs were found
congested. The viscera was preserved. The death of the deceased was possible on 23.01.2011 from
2.30 pm to 3.00 pm. In cross examination he states as follows:
After the post mortem, he was not definite about the cause of death, and therefore, in
order to know he had preserved and sealed the viscera and one piece of liver and
spleen. The present case being of the sensitive nature, a panel of doctors with utmost
care and caution conducted the post mortem. It was sought to be confirmed whether
there was any external injury on the body of the deceased or strangulation or whether
the marks of the death was concealed or not. Next, he says that on account of food
poisoning, the organs may be congested and death could have taken place due to
Tuberculosis, as due to Tuberculosis, the internal organs could be congested.
THE TWO INVESTIGATING OFFICERS
11. PW10 started investigation on 23.01.2011. He took the statement of Smt. Imlesh (aunt of
deceased)(who was examined as PW6) and also PW4 (sister of deceased). On 05.03.2011, on being
promoted, he was transferred. In his cross-examination, he says that he had started investigation on
the same day (23.01.2011) after 5:00pm. When he went for inspection of the place of occurrence, at
that time, the door was not locked and no accused was present in the house. He says that he has not
specified in the diary that the accused was searched in the house and they did not meet him. The
place of occurrence is Shivalik Nagar. There are several houses in the locality of different persons
near the house of the accused. He admits that he has not inquired regarding the incident from any
neighbourhood person. He further states that he had not collected any evidence regarding the
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
5

demand of dowry from any independent person. There is no mention about any reason in the arrest
of the accused persons in Exhibit Ka-15. He continued with the investigation till 03.03.2011. He
deposes that the complainant (PW1) had given the statement that before one month, the first
appellant had reached their house along with the deceased and he stated that he was constructing a
second house for rent purposes and therefore Rs. 10,00,000/- was demanded which he will return.
PW2 has not told him that his father had spent Rs. 15,00,000/- according to his capacity. It is
correct, he says that in the cause of death of Priyanka, the word ‘dowry’ has not been used. It is
further stated that Smt. Imlesh (the aunt of the deceased and examined as PW6) has not used the
word ‘dowry’ in harassing the deceased by her in-laws. Smt. Imlesh has not stated to him in the
statement that father-in-law has ever harassed her for dowry. He admits as correct that during
investigation, the first appellant informed him that he had taken the deceased for medical treatment
in different hospitals. This fact came to him in the knowledge from his statement. PW10 admits that
he had not done any investigation from any hospital regarding the treatment of the deceased and the
cause of death. He is unable to give the reason as to why he did not do it.
12. PW11 is the investigating officer who took over the investigation on 05.03.2011 from PW10. He
says that on 18.04.2011 after recording the statement of the witnesses and on the evidences available
he submitted the charge sheet against the appellants. He has also not done investigation by way of
recording any statement of any neighbour. He admits that it is necessary that the death should be
unnatural for submitting a charge sheet under Section 304-B. In the opinion of PW5 doctor who
conducted the post mortem, the cause of death was unknown. He preserved viscera to know the
reason for death. When he is asked as to whether till the filing of the charge sheet, he was having any
reliable evidence for unnatural death of the deceased, his answer is only he was having oral
evidence. When he is further questioned as to what evidence was available with regard to which
witness regarding unnatural death, he responds by deposing that when she died, the deceased was
not with her family members. At that time all the three appellants were with her. Therefore, it was
not possible to record the oral evidence of the accused persons. He admits that it is correct that no
public witness was found regarding the unnatural death during investigation. PW10 has recorded
the statement of first appellant that he has taken the deceased to hospital, deposes PW11. He
submits that this came to his knowledge after perusal of the investigation done by the previous
investigating officer. He also did not record the statement of any doctor of the aforesaid hospitals
and he did not interrogate.
13. It is necessary now to notice the evidence adduced by appellants. DW1 is Dr. K.K. Aggarwal,
Retired Chief Medical Officer and Physician, BHEL, at Shivalik Nagar. He deposed that on
01.12.2010, the deceased went to him with the complaint of dry cough. He advised blood
investigation. She was suffering from Eosinophilia. Exhibit-Kha-1, is the original Medical
Prescription by DW1. She was treated from 01.12.2010 to 19.12.2012. in cross-examination he states
that Eosinophilia may be caused due to change in weather. By increase in Eosinophilia, it may cause
cough, sneezing and breathing problem. Several persons are suffering from disease of higher
Eosinophilia.
14. DW2 is a Gynaecologist working in Lilavati Hospital, Shivalik Nagar. She has passed M.B.B.S.
and B.G.O. Degree. On 11.05.2010, Priyanka (the deceased), aged 24 years, went to her for
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
6

treatment. She complained of pain in her stomach and discharge of white fluid. She was old patient
of Tuberculosis (TB), which was told by her. She remained in her treatment from 11.5.2010 to
14.5.2010. The patient was having weight of 39 kilograms and her weight was below normal limit.
She proved the original prescription as Exhibit-Kha-2.
15. In cross-examination she states as follows:
She complained of stomach pain and discharge of white fluid. She asked the patient
to come on 15.05.2010 at 12.00 p.m.. Thereafter, the patient did not go to her. It was
correct, she says, that the disease, which was treated by her, was cured within four to
five days. Then she says that, it is possible that the patient may be cured, and
therefore, she did not come on 15.05.2012. She volunteered further that she called the
patient on 15.05.2010 but she did not return. She does not know why. She further
states that it is correct that it was told by the patient upon her query that she was
suffering with the disease of TB and took treatment for nine months. She does not
treat TB. The treatment, which she gave, has no relationship with TB. It is correct
that TB may be cured after taking treatment for six months or nine months. She
deposed that it is wrong to state that the patient, who is suffering pain in stomach,
since several days, and eat very less, therefore, his weight may reduce. This is after
admitting that the patient had complained for stomach pain.
16. DW3 is the Head of the Department of Education Faculty in a College. He has
deposed, inter alia, that the deceased got admission in college in 2008-09 and
completed the course for the year 2009-2010. The attendance of the deceased was
more than 75 per cent.
Thus, she appeared in the examination in August, 2010. She also appeared for the practical
examination on 16.11.2010.
17. In cross-examination, inter alia it is brought out that her attendance fell drastically after
December, 2009, and that, it was more than 99 per cent, prior to December.
18. DW4 is a Medical Practitioner since 1987 in a Nursing and Maternity Home at Meerut Road,
Mawana, Meerut District. She has passed M.B.B.S. and B.G.O.. On 02.06.2007, the deceased came
to her and she remained under her treatment. She told about her disease of TB. Thereafter, the
patient went to her on 02.12.2009. On that day she told that she is about to marry on 10.12.2009,
thus, she wanted to postpone her periods, for which, she gave her medicines. Thereafter, the
deceased went to her on 31.08.2010. The patient told about the history of Coax (TB of stomach). The
original prescription for the three dates were marked as Kha- 5, 6 and 7, respectively. On
02.06.2007, she advised the patient, on her prescription, for blood test and x-ray of chest. She
prescribed medicines for Anaemia because the patient told about TB earlier. Therefore, she advised
blood test and x-ray to confirm whether TB had been totally cured or not. But the patient did not
bring any x-ray or blood report.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
7

19. In cross-examination she says that she is a Gynaecologist. On 02.06.2007, the deceased came to
the hospital with the disease of weakness. In her medical history, she has stated about TB for last ten
years. She states that it is correct that after ten years, and till coming to her, the deceased never told
about symptoms of such disease. If the patient takes complete treatment for three years, there is no
possibility for the said disease. She says that during the two and a half years, between 02.06.2007
and 02.12.2009, and after 02.12.2009, the deceased never complained about TB. On 31.08.2010,
DW4 did not investigate for TB symptoms nor any complaint about it. TB may be caused in the
chest, stomach or any other organ. It is further stated that from 02.06.2007 to 31.08.2010, Priyanka
(the deceased), was regularly coming to DW4 for treatment for three years. She ends her deposition
by stating that during the three years period, the deceased never complained about TB nor she
found any symptoms under investigation.
20. The analysis of the above evidence would reveal the following:
DW1 treated the deceased from 01.12.2010 to 19.12.2010. The deceased was suffering
from high Eosinophilia. She had complained of dry cough.
DW2, a Gynaecologist, treated the deceased from 11.05.2010 to 14.05.2010. The deceased
complained of pain in the stomach and discharge of white fluid. The deceased told the Doctor that
she was an old patient of TB. Markedly, the deceased was found to have weight of only 39 kilograms,
which was found to be below the normal limit. DW4, again another Gynaecologist, also treated her
on 31.08.2010. The Doctor clearly deposed about the patient telling about the history of TB in the
stomach. While DW1 and DW2 are from Haridwar, where the appellants reside, it is noteworthy that
DW4 practised at Mawana, Meerut where the deceased had her paternal home. The evidence of
DW4 would show that the deceased was under treatment of DW4, for 3 years from 02.06.2007 to
31.08.2010. On 02.06.2007, the Doctor advised her to go in for blood test and x-ray of chest to
confirm whether she was cured, the DW4 is categoric that she did not bring any x-ray or blood
report. It is within little over a month, from the date of treatment of DW1 and within a few months
of treatment of DW4, that the deceased passed away in January, 2011 on 23.01.2011.
21. We may also notice that in the Van Nostrand’s Scientific Encyclopaedia (3rd Edition). It is
stated, inter-alia, as follows:
Tuberculosis: A chronic or acute infectious disease caused by an invasion of the body
by the Bacillus tuberculosis. It may exist without causing symptoms (inactive
tuberculosis) or with symptoms (active tuberculosis). The symptoms of tuberculosis
depend on the organ involved, the virulence of the strain of tubercle bacilli and the
resistance of the individual infected. Almost any organ or tissue of the body may be
attacked by the tuberculosis process, although the commonest site is the lungs.
We notice that in the discussion relating to pulmonary Tuberculosis, it is, inter alia,
stated as follows:
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
8

Some individuals are unable to handle the infection, and in spite of good treatment
early in the disease they go on to develop severe symptoms and widespread, often
fatal, tuberculosis. Others are able to keep a small lesion localized, and in the course
of a year of treatment complete healing may be accomplished.
The complications of pulmonary tuberculosis are associated with spread of the
disease to near and distant organs. In some instances, the pulmonary disease may b
quite minor, and the first manifestation may occur when urinary tract, or abdominal,
tuberculosis begins to cause symptoms. The various forms of abdominal tuberculosis
are treated with x-ray and ultra-violet light as well as the usual general measures.
The prognosis in tuberculosis depends on many factors. The type, duration and
extent of disease when treatment is begun, the resistance of the patient to the
tubercle bacillus are of prime importance. Early treatment increases the percent of
cures enormously. The importance of continuation of treatment, usually for a
minimum of 2 years, cannot be overestimated. Since relapses are relatively common
even after apparent cure, restriction of activities and regular check-up examinations
for a period of years are essential.
In the latest edition, the 10th edition of the same work, we notice the following:
If the disease is left untreated, very serious complications can occur. Sometimes
patients are hospitalized during the initial stages of therapy. The administration of
drugs for about two weeks usually markedly reduces the ability of the patient to infect
others. Persons with nonpulmonary tuberculosis are considerably less infectious than
those with the pulmonary form and thus sometimes can be managed entirely as
outpatients.
The rise of incidence of TB commencing in the mid 1980s generally is attributed to
two causes, each of which has had a measurable effect:
1. An increased resistance shown by M. tuberculosis to the drugs administered.
Current research is illustrating the veracity of the cause.
2. xxx xxx xxx THE FINDINGS BY THE SESSIONS JUDGE.
22. The telephonic call, which is made by PW1 on the fateful day cannot be treated as First
Information Report and it is just an information given to the police and the FIR marked in the case
is that what he had given after seeing the dead body of his daughter. The deceased was married to
the first appellant on 10.12.2009. She died on 23.01.2011. The death was within seven years of
marriage. The prosecution was unable to prove that the deceased died due to poison. From the
search in the house of the deceased, no poisonous substance was found. It is also found that in the
Wiper by which vomiting of the deceased was wiped (referred to in the charge sheet noted by us at
para 4 of this judgment) it was not proved that this was only poison. In the viscera also, there is no
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
9

poison. Though there was a long gap in sending the viscera, the appellants could not be blamed for
the same. Though, the deceased died at a very young age of 28 years, there is a history of
tuberculosis before marriage. He refers to the evidence of the doctors which we have already
referred to and also the information provided by the first appellant that he had taken the deceased
to the hospital. It was the duty of the investigating officer to record the statements of the last
treating doctor. It cannot be said that deceased died due to poison. No injury was found on the body
of the deceased as per the inquest report and post mortem. The oral evidence adduced by the
prosecution itself ruled out physical cruelty in connection with the dowry.
23. PW1 and PW2 had deposed about the demand of Rs. 10 lacs. The Sessions Judge even finds that
apart from the fact that the said fact is not clearly proved and there are many interpretations about
the same asking for such an amount by the accused (first appellant), after the marriage and when he
assured that he will return the same, it cannot be a demand for dowry. The Court took the view that
all the witnesses admitted that before the marriage and at the time of marriage, there was no
demand for dowry by the appellants. Even when she came home, immediately after the marriage,
there was no demand for dowry. The Court notes the following contradictions in evidence of PW1
and PW2. PW1 has deposed that one month before the incident, the first appellant and the deceased
came to the house at Mawana. There, the first appellant demanded Rs. 10 lacs. PW1 expressed
inability. But he pledged ornaments of his wife and gave Rs. 1 lakh. PW2, his son, on the other hand,
says that four months before the date of an incident, the first appellant and the deceased came to
their house at Mawana and they demanded for Rs. 10 lacs. He pledges the jewellery of his wife and
gave Rs. 1 lakh. PW3 has developed this theory further and deposed that PW1 had pledged the
jewellery of his daughter-in-law and gave Rs. 1 lakh to the first appellant. This is not the version of
either PW1 or PW2. On the basis of contradictions, he finds that there is neither demand for Rs. 10
lacs by the first appellant nor was Rs. 1 lakh given. The deceased was found doing her B.Ed.. DW3,
who is the official of the college, has deposed about the deceased attending the college and also the
attendance which we have already referred to. It is admitted that while doing B.Ed., the deceased
remained with her parents as the college was nearby. She visited her home so many times. There is
no report to the police in regard to the harassment for dowry. As told by the deceased regarding the
taking of Salfas (poison), it is noted as a serious matter, in which case, the report should have not
been lodged which is admittedly not the case. There is no reference as to the date of demand. The
car was found registered in the name of PW1. The application for the release of the car which had
been taken into custody was made by PW1. This falsified the case of gift set up by the prosecution.
The taking of help for some purposes would not fall within dowry (this is with respect to the demand
for Rs. 10 lacs). There is ample evidence to show that the deceased was a patient of Tuberculosis and
also suffering from Eosinophilia and stomach ache. This may be the cause of her death. It has been
found that this is not a dowry death. There is no charge under the Dowry Prohibition Act and
Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code and the only charge under Section 304-B not being proved,
the appellants were acquitted. THE FINDINGS BY THE HIGH COURT IN THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT.
24. Though at the solemnization of marriage, there is no discussion of dowry, however, after 2-3
months, the accused and his family members (appellants) started demanding dowry. Thereafter,
reference is made to PW8, who deposed that Panchas opined that it was a case of poisoning. The
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
10

High Court finds that the evidence of DW1 does not reveal that the deceased was suffering from
Tuberculosis and that she had Eosinophilia. Referring to the evidence of DW2- Dr. Mamta Tyagi,
the High Court says that the deceased was only complaining of stomach ache and discharge of white
fluid. The patient has never told the doctor about her Tuberculosis. The treatment also did not relate
to the Tuberculosis. The doctor has admitted that Tuberculosis can be cured after six to seven
months of treatment. The High Court, thus, concludes that it is in evidence of DW1 and DW2 that
deceased was not suffering from Tuberculosis. Thereafter, the High Court goes through evidence of
DW4 and finds that the doctor had admitted that once the treatment was taken ten years back for
Tuberculosis, there was no question of recurrence of the disease. The deceased had gone to her on
02.12.2009 for the postponement of her menstrual cycle and the marriage took place on
09.12.2009. The deceased has never told the symptoms of Tuberculosis after 02.12.2009. The High
Court finds as follows:
“It is thus, evident from the statements of DW1 Dr. K.K. Aggarwal, DW2 Dr. Mamta
Tyagi and DW4 Dr. Neera Chandra that Priyanka was not suffering from
tuberculosis. She was never treated by them for tuberculosis. DW1 Dr. K.K. Aggarwal
has treated Priyanka for common ailment. DW2 Dr. Mamta Tyagi has admitted that
the treatment given to Priyanka has nothing to do with tuberculosis”
25. The deceased was never taken to any hospital.
According to the investigation officer, she was taken to various hospitals though there is no record.
It is further pointed out that when specific question was put to the accused under Section 313 CrPC,
as to how the deceased was recovered from the car parked in front of their house, a simpliciter
denial was made. Thereafter, we may notice paragraph-34:
“There is ample evidence on record that the accused were demanding dowry from the
deceased. The parents of the deceased were not in a position to meet the illegal
demand of dowry. It has come in the FIR that it was the case of poisoning. PW3
Sohan Singh has noticed that body has turned blue. PW5 Dr. Ashok Kumar has
admitted that on the opening of body, internal organs were congested, which could be
due to poisoning. Merely the fact that poison was not found on the Viscera vide
exhibit 55 Ka/4, it cannot be said that deceased was not administered poisoning.”
26. Then the High Court refers to the judgment of this Court in Anant Chintaman
Lagu v. State of Bombay1. This Court therein held that in any case of poison, the
three elements must be established:
1. Death took place by poisoning.
2. The accused had the poison in his possession.
3. The accused had an opportunity to administer the poison to the deceased.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
11

Thereafter, there is reference to case law. The Court then finds as follows:
“(42). In the instant case, the prosecution has proved the case based on entirely circumstantial
evidence. The chain is complete from the date of telephonic call received by PW1 Harendra Singh
from his daughter till the recovery of body in Santro car on 23.01.2011. The plea taken by the
accused is false and it is a vital link to prove circumstantial evidence on which the present case rests.
            xxx          xxx        xxx      xxx
1   AIR 1960 SC 500
(44). In the present case, the deceased was in the house of accused at the time of her death. It was
for the accused to explain satisfactorily the circumstances under which the victim died on
23.01.2011. PW3 Sohan Singh has also deposed that the accused ran away from the spot. It was a
case of homicide by poisoning. The accused were required to explain under Section 106 of Cr.P.C.,
the circumstances in which the death of Priyanka was caused and her dead body was recovered from
the rear set of the car parked in front of their house. It has also come on record that the husband of
Priyanka-deceased and other family members were residing in the same house.”
27. With regard to medical opinion, it was found that the opinion of the doctor cannot affect the
value of deposition of truthful eyewitness. It is found that the appellants have failed to rebut the
presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act.
28. Then the Court finds that the prosecution has duly proved that the deceased was killed due to
cruelty and harassment for dowry and that it proved the ingredients of cruelty and harassment in
connection with the demand for dowry immediately before the death. Thereafter, we may notice:
“(60). The dead body of Priyanka was recovered from the rear seat of Santro car, as
per the statements of PW1 Harendra Singh, PW2 Sandeep, PW3 Sohan Singh and
PW8 Puran Singh Rana. The accused have not given any explanation why the dead
body of Priyanka was lying in the car. The accused have not explained the
circumstance why the dead body was lying in the car, even, in the statement recorded
under Section 313 of Cr.P.C.
(61). Learned Trial Judge has overlooked this very vital fact that the dead body of
Priyanka was recovered from the rear seat of the car and to which no explanation
whatsoever has been given by the accused.” (Emphasis supplied) Finally, we notice:
“(64). In the present case, the statements of DW1 Dr. K.K. Aggarwal, DW2 Mamta
Tyagi and DW4 Dr. Neera Chandra do not inspire confidence. They have issued false
certificates to save the accused.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
12

Priyanka-deceased was never suffering from tuberculosis. This tendency on the part of private
practitioners to issue false certificate is required to be curbed.” (Emphasis supplied)
29. On this basis, the appellants were found guilty under Section 304-B read with Section 498A and
Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act. Thereafter, by exercising power under Section 362 of
the CrPC and noticing that there is an error in that the appellants were also wrongly convicted under
Section 498A of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act. The conviction thereunder was
ordered to be deleted. Thereafter, the appellants were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life
under Section 304-B of IPC.
30. We have heard learned senior counsel for the appellants, Shri Siddharth Dave, Shri Krishnam
Mishra, learned counsel for the first respondent-State and Shri Sanjay Kumar Dubey, learned
counsel for PW1(father of the deceased) and the appellant before the High Court.
31. Learned senior counsel for the appellants submitted that there is absolutely no basis for the High
Court to reverse the judgment of acquittal rendered by the learned Sessions Judge, overlooking the
well-settled principles in regard to the approach to be made by the Appellate Court, when there is an
acquittal by the Trial Court. Apart from initial presumption, it is elementary that the acquittal of the
accused by the Trial Court completely reinforces the presumption and there is a double presumption
of innocence. The Appellate Court will interfere with the acquittal only if the judgment of the Trial
Court is perverse, he points out. He would urge that the deceased was indeed taken to the doctors
when her condition was noticed. He submitted that for a conviction under Section 304B, the
fundamental basis is to be the unnatural death of the woman within seven years of her marriage
among other elements. But in this case, the prosecution has not proved that the death was
unnatural. She was taking treatment. The findings of the Sessions Judge to the effect that there was
demand for dowry, could not be acted upon, has been jettisoned without any basis. The deceased
weighed just 39 kilograms, an unerring pointer to both her illness and her health condition, in 2010,
a few months before her death. No poisonous substance was found in viscera, he poses the question
as to on what basis, the High Court could have entered the verdict of guilt after reversing the
judgment of the learned Sessions Judge. No poison was found in the house of the appellants. There
were no marks of any injury as already noted. There is no demand for dowry right from the
beginning. The first appellant had informed the Police. They had not run away. Reliance is placed on
the evidence of PW11-I.O. besides the evidence of PW1. There was no basis to draw the inference
which is drawn on the basis that the body was found in the rear portion of the car. He drew support
from the Judgment of this Court in Chhotan Sao and another v. State of Bihar2.
32. Per contra, the learned counsel for the State pointed out that there was demand for dowry and
harassment after few months of marriage. Even in the questioning by the Court under Section 313,
the denial by the first appellant would show that he was complicit in the crime. The finding of the
dead body in the rear of the car in front of the house, is emphasized. 2(2014) 4 SCC 54
33. Shri Sanjay Kumar Dubey, appearing for respondent No.2, sought to support the impugned
judgment. He referred to the entry in the General Diary indicating that the phone call was made on
23.01.2011 pointing to the events showing the complaint voiced over phone by the deceased. He
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
13

pointed out the affidavit by appellant No.2, wherein he states that the deceased died of poisoning.
This suffices to show that the death was unnatural attracting Section 304B. The alleged
contradictions in the deposition of prosecution witness is also sought to be explained.
The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant would point out that no reliance should be placed on
statement in the Affidavit of the second appellant in the Bail Application about the death being a
suicide. This is not part of the evidence.
ANALYSIS
34. Though, since long, the law declaring the narrowing of appellate court’s jurisdiction in regard to
scope of interference with a verdict of acquittal, is settled, we may only refer to one decision. In
Ghurey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh3, after an exhaustive review of case law, this Court laid down,
as follows:
“69. The following principles emerge from the cases above:
1. The appellate court may review the evidence in appeals against acquittal under Sections 378 and
386 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973. Its power of reviewing evidence is wide and the appellate
court can reappreciate the entire evidence on record. It can review the trial court's conclusion with
respect to both facts and law.
2. The accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty. The accused possessed this presumption
when he was before the trial court. The trial court's acquittal bolsters the presumption that he is
innocent.
3. Due or proper weight and consideration must be given to the trial court's decision. This is
especially true when a witness' credibility is at issue.
It is not enough for the High 3 (2008) 10 SCC 450 Court to take a different view of the evidence.
There must also be substantial and compelling reasons for holding that the trial court was wrong.
70. In light of the above, the High Court and other appellate courts should follow the well-
settled principles crystallised by number of judgments if it is going to overrule or otherwise disturb
the trial court's acquittal:
1. The appellate court may only overrule or otherwise disturb the trial court's
acquittal if it has “very substantial and compelling reasons” for doing so.
A number of instances arise in which the appellate court would have “very substantial and
compelling reasons” to discard the trial court's decision. “Very substantial and compelling reasons”
exist when:
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
14

(i) The trial court's conclusion with regard to the facts is palpably wrong;
(ii) The trial court's decision was based on an erroneous view of law;
(iii) The trial court's judgment is likely to result in “grave miscarriage of justice”;
(iv) The entire approach of the trial court in dealing with the evidence was patently illegal;
(v) The trial court's judgment was manifestly unjust and unreasonable;
(vi) The trial court has ignored the evidence or misread the material evidence or has ignored
material documents like dying declarations/report of the ballistic expert, etc.
(vii) This list is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.
2. The appellate court must always give proper weight and consideration to the findings of the trial
court.
3. If two reasonable views can be reached—one that leads to acquittal, the other to conviction—the
High Courts/appellate courts must rule in favour of the accused.”
35. It is well to remember that while the search of the truth and adjudicatory function of the
judiciary are not strange bedfellows, these self-imposed limitations on the pursuit are based on the
nature of jurisdiction. Every deviation from such limits could indeed result in grave injustice
requiring correction to prevent miscarriage of justice. Excess of jurisdiction can have very serious
repercussions, particularly when, what is involved is, personal liberty, which is inevitably at stake in
a criminal trial.
36. We have set out the findings of the Trial Court. The charge is one under Section 304B. The
ingredients of the offence are well-settled. A marriage performed within seven years before the
death of the wife. The death must be unnatural. Soon before the death, the deceased wife must have
been at the receiving end of cruelty or harassment, on account of demand for dowry. It is described
as dowry death. The relatives concerned, including husband, become liable. Section 113B of the
Evidence Act comes to the rescue of the prosecutor by providing for a presumption that a person has
caused dowry death if, it is shown that soon before her death, she was subjected by such person for
cruelty or harassment for or in connection with demand for dowry.
37. In this case, as regards the demand for Rs.10 lakhs by the first appellant, there are three striking
features. PW1, the complainant and the father of the deceased, deposes that about one month before
the death, the deceased and the first appellant came to him at Mawana and first appellant sought
Rs.10 lakhs from him and that they will return the money. He being moved by the tears in his
daughter’s eyes, pawned his late wife’s jewellery, raised one lakh and gave to the appellant and his
daughter. However, PW2, his son, deposed that it was four months before the death that the
deceased and the first appellant came to their house at Mawana, asked for Rs.10 lakhs. He sets up
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
15

the version that he raised one lakh by pawning his wife’s ornaments. Thus, the versions of PW1 and
PW2 both as regards time of demand and the manner of raising Rupees One lakh, appear to be
clearly contradictory. What is more significant is the further contradiction introduced by PW3 who
is the brother-in-law of PW1. He deposes that two months from the incident, he had gone to the
home of PW1, who informed him that the in-laws of the deceased are demanding Rs.10 lakhs for the
construction of the house for the purpose of rent. PW1 showed his inability. It is important to notice
what PW3 next says:
“Thereafter, the in-laws of Priyanka (the deceased) started torturing her badly”.
38. What follows next is the last nail in the coffin of the prosecution version, which completely
falsifies what both PW1 and PW2 has deposed. PW3 states that PW1, after pawning ornaments of his
son’s wife, paid Rs.1 lakh to the first appellant. The learned Sessions Judge entered findings noting
these contradictory versions. He also finds that if the father-in-law is approached for a sum of
money after the marriage, on the basis that it will be returned back, it may not amount to a dowry
demand.
39. It is to be noted that PW1 has admitted that there was no demand for dowry before or at the time
of marriage. The marriage took place on 10.12.2009. The death was on 23.01.2011. Though PW1,
PW3, PW4 and PW6 have spoken about harassment on account of dowry, the learned Sessions
Judge did not find material reliable. It is to be noted that the version about the demand for Rs.10
lakhs is found wholly unacceptable. The Trial Court has the advantage of watching the demeanor of
the witnesses.
40. The I.Os- PW10 and PW11, have not made any enquiry from the neighbours of the appellants.
The deceased was attending the B.Ed course as seen from the evidence of DW3. No complaint,
whatsoever was given by PW1 to PW3 to any authority. We do not see any material except the
testimony of PW1 to PW3 and PW6, which did not, at any rate, inspire the confidence of the Trial
Court. It does not also commend itself to us either.
41. PW6, aunt of the deceased also has given evidence in support of the prosecution. The forensic
report is dated 28.3.2014. It states that metallic poisons, Ethyl Alcohol, Methyl Alcohol, cyanide,
phosphides, Alkaloids, Barbiyurates, Tranquilizers and Pesticides were not detected in the exhibits.
DID THE APPELLANTS RUN AWAY?
42. The incident took place on 23.01.2011. PW1 deposed that on the said date the Police had taken in
their custody the Santro car before PW1 because in the car the dead body of the deceased was kept.
Next, he says that the first appellant was present.
43. Next the appellant would point out the statement of PW 11, the second investigating officer. He
deposed in answer to the question in cross examination as to the oral evidence of which witness was
available regarding unnatural death, that at the time of death all the accused were with her.
Therefore, it was not possible to record the oral evidence of the appellants.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
16

44. Further the evidence of PW9, police officer, is to the effect that on 24.1.2011 he arrested the
appellants from their house at L-84, Shivalik at 6.45 pm.
45. No case is thus made out for drawing any inference against the appellants.
46. PW1 has deposed that the Police had already reached the spot before him. Appellants have a case
that they had informed the police. No doubt, the respondent No.2 has sought to rely upon an entry
in the general diary suggesting that PW1 had called from his mobile number that his daughter
informed that in- laws have killed her by giving poison and he is reaching at her home and he may
also be provided help. In fact, this is a document which is produced by the second respondent before
this Court in the petition to produce additional documents. It is not marked as such. But when PW9
is examined, he refers to the carbon copy of the Report No.28. However, he says he was not present
at the Police Station at the time of Report. We do not see anything turning on it at any rate to
advance the prosecution version.
THE LAW ABOUT POISONING: APPLICATION TO FACTS
47. The High Court refers to the oft quoted decision of this Court in Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State
of Bombay4. In the said case, three tests came to be reiterated, as necessary to establish in a case of
poisoning.
1. Death took place on account of poisoning
2. The accused had the poison in his possession
3. The accused had an opportunity to administer the poison 4 AIR 1960 SC 500
48. In fact, in the said case wherein the conviction of the appellant was affirmed by a majority of
2:1., the appellant was a medical doctor. He was found in the company of the deceased on a train
and when the deceased was taken to the hospital also, his presence was noted. The deceased was left
behind gold ornaments and valuables by her late husband. Although there was no scientific evidence
to show poisoning, the court relied upon a number of circumstances which in the main was conduct
of the appellant which has been detailed in paragraph-74 of the judgment pointing to poisoning of
the deceased by the appellant. In this context we notice the following statement of the law contained
in paragraphs-59 and 68.
“59. The cases of this Court which were decided, proceeded upon their own facts, and though the
three propositions must be kept in mind always, the sufficiency of the evidence, direct or
circumstantial, to establish murder by poisoning will depend on the facts of each case. If the
evidence in a particular case does of not justify the inference that death is the result of poisoning
because of the failure of the prosecution to prove the fact satisfactorily, either directly or by
circumstantial evidence, then the benefit of the doubt will have to be given to the accused person.
But if circumstantial evidence, in the absence of direct proof of the three elements, is so decisive that
the court can unhesitatingly hold that death was a result of administration of poison (though not
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
17

detected) and that the poison must have been administered by the accused person, then the
conviction can be rested on it.
xxx xxx xxx xxx
68. Circumstantial evidence in this context means a combination of facts creating a net-work
through which there is no escape for the accused, because the facts taken as a whole do not admit of
any inference but of his guilt. To rely upon the findings of the medical man who conducted the
post-mortem and of the chemical analyser as decisive of the matter is to render the other evidence
entirely fruitless. While the circumstances often speak with unerring certainty, the autopsy and the
chemical analysis taken by themselves may be most misleading. No doubt, due weight must be given
to the negative findings at such examinations. But, bearing in mind the difficult task which the man
of medicine performs and the limitations under which he works, his failure should not be taken as
the end of the case, for on good and probative circumstances, an irresistible inference of guilt can be
drawn.”
49. Next, we may notice the judgment of this Court rendered by a Bench of three learned judges in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra5. We notice only paragraph 165. The same reads
as follows:
               “165. So far as       this matter is
               concerned, in such     cases the court
               must carefully scan    the evidence and
               determine     the     four    important
circumstances which alone can justify a conviction:
(1) there is a clear motive for an accused to administer poison to the deceased, (2)
that the deceased died of poison said to have been administered, (3) that the accused
had the poison in his possession, (4) that he had an opportunity to administer the
poison to the deceased.”
50. In this case, there is no evidence at all that the deceased died of poisoning. Secondly, there is no
evidence to show that the appellants had poison in their possession. Thus, even proceeding on the
basis that being the wife and daughter-in-law who was living (1984) 4 SCC 116 with them that the
appellants may have had the opportunity to administer poison, the other two tests are not satisfied.
The police did not recover any poison from the appellants or their house. As already noticed the FSL
report categorically rules out the presence of any poison. As regards the appellants not being found
with any poison, we no doubt notice the view taken by a Bench of two learned judges and reported in
Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab6. The same reads as under:
“24. From the foregoing cases, it will be seen that in poison murder cases, the accused
was not acquitted solely on the failure of the prosecution to establish one or the other
requirement which this Court has laid down in Dharambir Singh case [ Criminal
Appeal No. 98 of 1958, decided on 4- 11-1958 (SC)] . We do not also find any case
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
18

where the accused was acquitted solely on the ground that the prosecution has failed
to prove that the accused had the poison in his possession. The accused in all the said
cases came to be acquitted by taking into consideration the totality of the
circumstances including (1988) 3 SCC 513 insufficient motive, weakness in the chain
of circumstantial evidence and likelihood of the deceased committing suicide.
25. We do not consider that there should be acquittal or the failure of the prosecution to prove the
possession of poison with the accused. Murder by poison is invariably committed under the cover
and cloak of secrecy. Nobody will administer poison to another in the presence of others. The person
who administers poison to another in secrecy will not keep a portion of it for the investigating officer
to come and collect it. The person who commits such murder would naturally take care to eliminate
and destroy the evidence against him. In such cases, it would be impossible for the prosecution to
prove possession of poison with the accused. The prosecution may, however, establish other
circumstances consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. The court then would
not be justified in acquitting the accused on the ground that the prosecution has failed to prove
possession of the poison with the accused.
26. The poison murder cases are not to be put outside the rule of circumstantial evidence. There
may be obvious very many facts and circumstances out of which the court may be justified in
drawing permissible inference that the accused was in possession of the poison in question.
There may be very many facts and circumstances proved against the accused which may call for tacit
assumption of the factum of possession of poison with the accused. The insistence on proof of
possession of poison with the accused invariably in every case is neither desirable nor practicable. It
would mean to introduce an extraneous ingredient to the offence of murder by poisoning. We
cannot, therefore, accept the contention urged by the learned counsel for the appellant. The accused
in a case of murder by poisoning cannot have a better chance of being exempted from sanctions than
in other kinds of murders. Murder by poisoning is run like any other murder. In cases where
dependence is wholly on circumstantial evidence, and direct evidence not being available, the court
can legitimately draw from the circumstances an inference on any matter one way or the other.”
51. We may notice that referring to the view taken in Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab (supra) as
above, another Bench of two learned judges of this Court in Jaipal v. State of Haryana7 and after
setting out the 4 circumstances which were laid down by this court in (2003) 1 SCC 169 Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra (supra) this Court held as follows:
“28. We may hasten to add that the availability of the third piece of evidence as
necessary to establish the case of murder by poisoning has been doubted in some of
the later decisions. To wit, in Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab [(1988) 3 SCC 513 :
1988 SCC (Cri) 694 : AIR 1988 SC 1011] it has been held that there may be very many
facts and circumstances proved against the accused which may call for tacit
assumption of the factum of possession of poison with the accused, and therefore, the
insistence on proof of presence of poison with the accused is neither desirable nor
practicable. Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State of Bombay [AIR 1960 SC 500 : 1960 Cri
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
19

LJ 682] is a case peculiar to its own facts and this Court by a majority of 2:1 held that
even in the absence of a decisive finding as to the exact cause of death and on a
finding that the death of the victim was the result of the administration of some
unrecognized poison or drug which would act as a poison, a finding as to guilt can be
arrived at based on circumstantial evidence. It was a case of extreme cunning and
premeditation.
The conduct of the accused after the death of his wife was unusual and abnormal and was so knit
together as to make a network of circumstances pointing only to his guilt. Still the majority opinion
observed: (AIR p.
523, para 68) “68. Circumstantial evidence in this context means a combination of facts creating a
network through which there is no escape for the accused, because the facts taken as a whole do not
admit of any inference but of his guilt.” In the present case we do not find any abnormality in the
conduct of the accused. He is an educated person, a teacher. If only he had administered any poison
to the deceased he would not have gone to the private clinic and government hospital where
poisoning as a cause of death would be immediately known or at least strongly suspected by the
doctor attending on the victim. Rather the accused wanted to be in the company of the deceased and
to have her treated. He attended on her at Navjeevan Hospital and took her to Civil Hospital.”
52. This court also explained the view taken in Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State of Bombay8. Again,
in Shanmughan vs. State of Kerala9 the decision in AIR Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab (supra)
came to be noticed. It was a case where death by poisoning was not in dispute. The only dispute was
whether it was homicidal or suicidal. The court took note of the injuries which were found on the
deceased. The victim 8 AIR 1960 SC 116 9 AIR 2012 SC 1142 had died of cyanide poison which is a
highly corrosive poison. The evidence of PW7 in the said case was that the injuries could be due to
forcible administration of the poison. The accused was specifically questioned about the injuries for
which he had no answer. It was in these circumstances that the court after referring to paragraph-25
of Bhupinder Singh v. State of Punjab (supra) found that it was a case of poisoning. As far as the
facts of the present case is concerned, we have noticed that there is absolutely no evidence relating
to poison in relation to the deceased. Were it a case of forcible poisoning, by using a corrosive
poison, there would been some marks. There are none. If it were forcible poisoning by using any
kind of poison, there would be struggle and resistance from the victim. In this regard, PW1 is to be
believed on 23.01.2011 at 9:30, he received a phone call from his daughter who, asked him to reach
Haridwar, otherwise these people will kill her. Also, in the charge-sheet the prosecution proposed to
prove its case based apart from the oral evidence the material recovered from the spot containing
the vomiting of the deceased, which was cleaned by the accused. However, as noticed by the Learned
Sessions Judge, the prosecution was unable to prove the presence of poison in the cleaning material
referred to as the wiper.
53. We find ourselves unable to subscribe to paragraph-42 in the impugned judgment that the chain
is complete from the time of the telephone call received by PW1 from his daughter till the recovery
of the body in the Santro car. We are unable to appreciate the circumstances as unfolded on the
morning of 23.1.2011 which allegedly started from the phone call of the daughter of PW1 as
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
20

thereafter the only other circumstance, is the recovery of the body in the rear seat of the Santro car.
The existence of any circumstances, as would fulfil the requirement, as laid down by this court in
paragraph-59 in Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State of Bombay (supra), are not present. In
paragraph-34 of the impugned judgment, the High Court refers to the FIR to notice that it is a case
of poisoning. It further refers to the evidence of PW5-Medical Doctor that he admitted that on
opening the body, the internal organs were congested, which could be due to poisoning. In this
regard it may be noticed that PW5 has stated that he was not definite about the cause of death. He
has further stated that on account of food poisoning the organs may be congested. Even more
importantly, the doctor has opined that the death could have taken place due to Tuberculosis as in
the case of Tuberculosis, the internal organs can be congested. The High Court has not referred to
this part of the evidence, namely, that the congestion of internal organ could be due to Tuberculosis.
Still further, there is a case for the appellants that food poisoning is to be distinguished from
administering of poison and what the doctor has referred to is food poisoning. The High Court finds
that merely because poison is not found, it cannot be said that deceased was not administered
poison.
54. At this juncture, though if in a given case, there is clinching evidence which establishes
poisoning, it may be true that absence of poison in the viscera may not be decisive. That is not the
position in the facts of this case. It is true that the division bench of the High Court also refers to
Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology wherein the author has stated as follows:
“It is possible that a person may die from the effects of a poison and yet, none may be
found in the body after death if the whole of the poison has disappeared from the
lungs by evaporation, or has been removed from the stomach and intestines by
vomiting and purging, and after absorption has been detoxified, conjugated and
eliminated from the system by the kidneys and other channels. Certain vegetable
poisons may not be detected in the viscera, as they have no reliable tests, while some
organic poisons, especially the alkaloids and glucosides, may be oxidation during life
or by putrefaction after death, be split up into other substances which have no
characteristic reactions sufficient for their identification.
Modi saw cases in which there were definite signs of death from poisoning, although
the Chemical Examiner failed to detect the poison in the viscera preserved for
chemical analysis. It has, therefore, been wisely held by Christison that in cases
where a poison has not been detected on chemical analysis, the judge, in deciding a
charge of poisoning, should weigh in evidence the symptoms, postmortem
appearances and the moral evidence.”
55. There are no symptoms, which point to poisoning. Nothing in the post mortem appearance is
brought out to show poisoning. The evidence of witnesses do not establish poisoning.
56. It is to be noticed that there is no evidence in this case which could have persuaded the High
Court to conclude that there were compelling reasons to interfere with the acquittal by the High
Court. The appreciation of the evidence of the witnesses by the trial court unless it is found to be a
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
21

case of misreading of the evidence or are based on an erroneous understanding of the law, could not
have been interfered with. When the High Court records that there is ample evidence on record that
the accused were demanding dowry from the deceased, it is done without noticing the features in
regard to the demand for Rs.10 lakhs. As far as the other evidence is concerned, the evidence has not
been accepted by the trial court as inspiring confidence. At best it could be said that there were two
views possible. Even if that were so, it did not furnish a ground to the High Court to overturn the
judgment of the trial court containing the findings which we have referred to. We do not think that
this is a case where the finding of the trial case could be characterised as perverse.
57. There is a contention raised by the second respondent that no reliance can be placed on the
deposition of DW2 and DW4 that the deceased told these doctors that she was suffering from
Tuberculosis as it was hearsay.
58. No such contention is raised before the trial court or before the High Court. Therefore, we need
not really deal with it. However, we may only notice the view taken by the Privy Council in
Subramanian vs. Public Prosecutor10. In the said decision the appellant was tried for being in
possession of ammunition illegally. His defence was that he had 10 1956 (1) WLR 965 been captured
by terrorists and he was put in duress. Evidence of the conversation by the terrorists was shut out by
the court on the basis that it constituted hearsay. The Privy Council did not approve of the said view.
It laid down as follows:
“In ruling out peremptorily the evidence of conversation between the terrorists and
the appellant the trial judge was in error. Evidence of a statement made to a witness
by a person who is not himself called as a witness may or may no be hearsay. It is
hearsay and inadmissible when the object of the evidence is to establish the truth of
what is contained in the statement. It is not hearsay and is admissible when it is
proposed to establish by the evidence, not the truth of the statement, but the fact that
it was made. The fact that the statement was made, quite apart from its truth, is
frequently relevant in considering the mental state and conduct thereafter of the
witness or of some other person in whose presence the statement was made. In the
case before their Lordships statements could have been made to the appellant by the
terrorists, which, whether true or not, if they had been believed by the appellant,
might reasonably have induced in him an apprehension of instant death if he failed to
conform to their wishes.
59. Even if we were to follow the said principles the statement attributed to the
deceased that she had told the doctors (DW2 and DW4) about her having suffered
from TB is admissible for the fact of her having stated so even if it is not admissible
for the truth of the statement. That apart, the action of the Medical Practitioner in
acting upon it, by way of prescribing medicines and ordering blood test and x-ray
would appear to be relevant and admissible. The appellants in their questioning
under Section 313 CrPC, set up the case of TB. We need not probe the matter further
including the aspect as to whether the matter may be relevant under Section 32 of the
Evidence Act.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
22

60. We may also draw support from the decision of this Court, relied upon by the
appellant in Chhotan Sao v.
State of Bihar (supra) and reported in (2014) 4 SCC
54. This was a case in fact where except for the cause of death all other facts necessary to prove the
offence under Section 304B of the IPC stood proved. This Court, however, proceeded to hold as
follows:
12. No doubt the prosecution has adduced sufficient evidence to establish all other
facts necessary to prove the offence under Section 304-B IPC except the cause of
death. As seen from the trial court judgment there are no injuries on the body of the
deceased.
Even according to the first information report the death was caused due to poisoning which the
deceased was compelled to consume. In such circumstances, the non-examination of the doctor who
conducted the post-mortem coupled with the failure to produce the forensic laboratory report
regarding the examination of viscera of the deceased leaves a gaping hole in the case of the
prosecution regarding the nature of the death of Babita Devi.
13. The learned counsel for the State placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Bhupendra v.
State of M.P. [(2014) 2 SCC 106: (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 1: (2013) 13 Scale 552], to which one of us,
Ranjana Prakash Desai, J., was a party. In the said case, no doubt this Court held that the
production of chemical examination report is not mandatory. The Court held as follows:
(SCC p. 112, para 23).
“23. These decisions clearly bring out that a chemical examination of the viscera is
not mandatory in every case of a dowry death; even when a viscera report is sought
for, its absence is not necessarily fatal to the case of the prosecution when an
unnatural death punishable under Section 304-B IPC or under Section 306 IPC takes
place; in a case of an unnatural death inviting Section 304-B IPC (read with the
presumption under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act, 1872) or Section 306 IPC (read
with the presumption under Section 113-A of the Evidence Act, 1872) as long as there
is evidence of poisoning, identification of the poison may not be absolutely
necessary.” On the facts of that case, this Court reached to the conclusion that there
was sufficient evidence on record to come to the conclusion that the death was due to
poisoning.
61. We are of the view that second respondent should not be permitted to draw
support from the statement in the Affidavit of the second appellant accompanying the
Bail Application of his wife to the effect that the deceased herself took poison. Quite
clearly, this is not evidence in the trial, as such.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
23

62. As already noticed, in this case, apart from the fact that prosecution has not been
able to establish that the cause of death was unnatural, the case setup about the
demand of Rs. 10 lakhs by accused appears to be riddled with irreconcilable
contradictions. Neither the post-mortem nor the Forensic Lab Report shows any
poisoning. No poison has been recovered at all from the house of the appellants.
There are no marks of injury at all on the deceased. Even the material (wiper)
recovered, according to prosecution, and which allegedly was used to clean vomit of
the deceased, did not disclose any poison. The statement of Medical Practitioner
(DW2) that the deceased was having weight of 39 kilograms and weight below
normal as on 11.05.2010 cannot be ignored. Equally, the evidence of DW4 that the
Doctor has prescribed medicine for Anaemia because the deceased had told about
Tuberculosis earlier also, cannot be ignored. Evidence as to advice to the deceased in
2007 to undergo blood test and the x-ray, to confirm whether TB has totally cured or
not and that the patient did not bring any x-ray or blood report, cannot be
overlooked.
Section 113B of Evidence Act may not apply in this case for the reason that in order that Section
113B applies, there must be evidence that soon before the death of the person, which proves that the
person, who is alleged to have caused death, treated the deceased with cruelty or harassed her or in
connection with a demand of dowry. We have noticed the state of the evidence in this regard. We are
also of the view that there was no justification at all for the High Court, in the facts of this case, to
have overturned acquittal by the Trial Court.
63. The High Court, in our view, without any justification, reversed the acquittal. The High Court
has sought to draw support from the circumstance that the dead body of the deceased was recovered
from the car. The first appellant has a case that he has taken the deceased to certain hospitals. There
is also a case that they themselves notified the Police. We find it certainly not a circumstance so as to
draw an inference that the deceased died an unnatural death or that the appellants administered
poison to her. We would think that the High Court has clearly erred in interfering with the acquittal
of the appellants by the High Court. The appeals are only to be allowed. We thus allow the Appeals.
The impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside and the judgment of the Sessions Judge is
restored. The first appellant who is in custody shall be released unless his custody is required in any
other case. As the appellants 2 and 3 are already on bail, their bail bonds shall stand discharged.
.....................J. (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN) .....................J. (K.M. JOSEPH) .....................J.
(ANIRUDDHA BOSE) NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 02, 2020.
Sandeep Kumar vs The State Of Uttarakhand on 2 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6883308/
24
