Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4623, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
752
Author: Surya Kant
Bench: Hrishikesh Roy, Surya Kant, N.V. Ramana
                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 7369 of 2019
      Satish @ Sabbe                                                      ..... Petition
                                                   VERSUS
      The State of Uttar Pradesh                                         .....Respondent
                                                     WITH
                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 8326 of 2019
                                                   JUDGMENT
Surya Kant, J:
1. These petitions, which were heard through video conferencing, have been filed by
Satish and Vikky @ Vikendra alias Virendra, seeking special leave to appeal against a
common order dated 28.04.2017 of the Allahabad High Court through which their
appeal against conviction under Section 364−A of the Indian Penal Code,
(hereinafter, “IPC”) and consequential sentence of life imprisonment, was turned
down.
Reason:
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
1

Page | 1 FACTS
2. The undisputable facts of the case are that on the evening of 12.06.2002, when one Vishal
Sarawat (the victim) was on his way to meet a friend, he was stopped by an acquaintance − Ramvir
Rana who asked him for a lift to his house. The unsuspecting victim walked into Ramvir’s house
where he was threatened with a pistol and forcibly administered tablets by the present petitioners
and one Ashok. Vishal was subsequently coerced to write a letter dated 04.07.2002 to his father,
seeking a ransom of Rs 2 crores. In the meanwhile, the victim’s father − Nepal Singh (the
complainant) filed a missing report with the police regarding his son. Vikky telephoned the victim’s
father on 10.07.2002, pretending to be one ‘Shekhar’. He exhorted him to seek help of Ramvir as an
intermediary and cautioned him against approaching the police. After a series of correspondences,
the ransom was renegotiated to Rs 32 lakhs, which was physically brought by the complainant to
Ramvir’s home on 14.07.2002. Both the petitioners were present in the house, with Vikky having
counted the ransom money. Upon assurance that his son would be safely sent back home by that
evening, the complainant passed on information to the police who immediately raided the house.
Ramvir was arrested, Vishal was rescued and Rs.31.70 lakhs were recovered. Although the police
witnessed them talking to Ramvir and Vishal (victim); Ashok, Satish Page | 2 and Vikky managed to
escape from the spot. They were, however, subsequently arrested on 16.07.2002 and charged for the
offence of kidnapping for ransom.
3. The case was, after investigation, committed to the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court –
I, Ghaziabad. Eleven witnesses deposed on behalf of the prosecution, which included the victim,
complainant, bystanders, and various police officers. In addition, one witness was called by the
Court itself. Incriminating voice recordings, Call Detail Records, seized ransom money, and a
revolver recovered at the instance of Vikky were also brought on record. The accused denied all
charges and examined three defence witnesses.
4. Placing reliance on a wealth of electronic evidence, the trial Court held that the charge under
Section 364−A IPC had been proved beyond reasonable doubt against all accused, and additionally
charge under Section 25 of the Arms Act, 1959 was also held to have been established against Ashok
and Vikky. Life imprisonment and fine of Rs 10,000 (or six months imprisonment in lieu thereof)
was awarded to each accused for the crime of kidnapping for ransom, besides concurrent sentence
of two years to Vikky and Ashok under the Arms Act.
5. All four accused appealed against their convictions before the Page | 3 Allahabad High Court.
After a detailed re−appreciation of evidence and discussion of various case laws, the High Court
found as a matter of fact that all elements required to constitute the offence of kidnapping for
ransom, have been proved beyond doubt. But the High Court observed that failure to record
disclosure statement under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 was fatal in proving recovery of the
revolver. The High Court thus dismissed the appeals and confirmed the sentence of life
imprisonment under Section 364−A of IPC, but conviction under Section 25 of the Arms Act was set
aside. PRESENT PROCEEDINGS
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
2

6. The aggrieved petitioners, Vikky and Satish, have filed separate Special Leave Petitions before us,
which have been heard at considerable length. On 06.09.2019, this Court tacitly declined to
interfere with their conviction for kidnapping, and accordingly refrained from granting leave to
appeal. However, limited notice was issued to the respondent−State, calling upon them to furnish
details regarding the petitioners’ entitlement to premature release. The aforementioned order reads
as follows:
“Limited notice be issued to the respondent−State of Uttar Pradesh to know whether
the petitioner is entitled for premature release from the prison as per the Jail
Manual”
7. Separate counter−affidavits have consequently been filed by the Page | 4 respondent−State on
18.12.2019, inter−alia, informing that Satish’s proposal for premature release under Section 2 of the
UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act, 1938 was still under consideration; whereas that of Vikky
was duly considered and rejected by a Committee headed by the District Magistrate, Ghaziabad on
26.02.2018.
8. Nevertheless, keeping in mind the long−period of incarceration undergone by the petitioners and
infirmities in consideration of their prayers for premature release as highlighted by their counsels,
this Court on 08.06.2020 directed fresh consideration of their cases for premature release and
passed the following order:
“Taking into consideration the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing
for the parties, we direct the learned counsel appearing for the State of U.P. to
consider the case of the petitioner (Satish @ Sabbe) in Special Leave Petition (Crl.)
No.7369 of 2019, which is stated to be pending before the State, as also the case of
the petitioner (Vikky Alias Vikendra Alias Virendra) in Special Leave Petition (Crl.)
No.8326 of 2019, which was earlier rejected by the said State, for their premature
release as per the Jail Manual, within a period of four weeks from today and place the
orders before this Court.”
9. It was brought to the notice of this Court on the next date of hearing that the respondent−State
had, without due application of mind, passed an unreasoned Order dated 13.07.2020 rejecting
premature release of Satish based on an earlier evaluation conducted Page | 5 on 29.01.2018. This
was contended to be in contravention of the directions issued by this Court as well as on a
misconceived notion of individual dignity. Similar allegations of evasive compliance and mechanical
rejection of Vikky’s case for premature release vide Government Order dated 29.07.2020, despite
his long incarceration and good conduct, were reiterated. Restricting their prayer(s) in terms of the
order dated 06.09.2019 of this Court, learned counsel(s) for Satish and Vikky have cited some
judgments, and relied upon various remission guidelines; to substantiate their plea to set−aside the
Orders rejecting petitioner’s prayer for premature release.
10. Finding that earlier orders directing fresh consideration of petitioners’ cases for premature
release had not been faithfully complied with, this Court on 25.08.2020, once more directed the
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
3

respondent−State to consider both cases afresh and pass appropriate reasoned orders within a week.
Since the petitioner’s prayer for premature release has again been declined vide Government Orders
dated 01.09.2020, hence learned counsel for the parties have been heard on the afore−stated limited
issue.
CONTENTIONS OF PARTIES
11. Over the course of the final hearing on 08.09.2020, it has been submitted by learned State
counsel that the Probation Board Page | 6 considered afresh Satish’s case and has refused probation
for the reasons that – first, the crime is heinous, second, petitioner is hardly 53−54 years old and
can repeat the crime, third, informant has serious apprehensions against his release, and fourth,
governmental authorities have adversely commented upon his release considering its direct adverse
effect on the society. Likewise, for Vikky, on grounds of his age of 43 years, healthy physical
condition, apprehensions of informant and nature of crime; his mercy petition had not been
recommended.
12. Counsel for the petitioners have very eruditely controverted the rationale and reasons embodied
in both the Government Orders. It was argued that although the impugned orders have been
purportedly passed under the Jail Manual and UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act, 1938; but,
the mandatory factors of ‘antecedents’ and ‘conduct in prison’ have totally been overlooked, and
instead various extraneous factors have been relied upon to justify the mechanical action. They
urged that no attempt was made to meet the petitioners to ascertain their proclivity for committing
crimes in the future, thus evidencing non−application of mind. The lengthy imprisonment, lack of
antecedents and good conduct in jail were again underscored by counsel for the petitioners to drive
home their prayers for premature release.
Page | 7 ANALYSIS
13. Whilst it is undoubtedly true that society has a right to lead a peaceful and fearless life, without
free−roaming criminals creating havoc in the lives of ordinary peace−loving citizens. But equally
strong is the foundation of reformative theory which propounds that a civilised society cannot be
achieved only through punitive attitudes and vindictiveness; and that instead public harmony,
brotherhood and mutual acceptability ought to be fostered. Thus, first−time offenders ought to be
liberally accorded a chance to repent their past and look− forward to a bright future.1
14. The Constitution of India through Articles 72 and 161, embody these reformative principles by
allowing the President of India and the Governor of a State to suspend, remit or commute sentences
of convicts. Further, Section 432 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“CrPC”) streamlines such
powers by laying down procedure and pre−conditions for release. The only embargo under Section
433−A of CrPC is against the release of persons sentenced to life imprisonment till they have served
at least fourteen years of their actual sentence.
15. The UP Prisoners Release on Probation Act, 1938 also lays down the principles upon which such
decisions to release on probation are required to be taken. Its Section 2 says that:
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
4

Maru Ram v. Union of India, 1981 (1) SCC 107.
Page | 8 “2. Power of Government to release by licence on conditions imposed by
them – Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 401 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), where a person is confined in prison under a
sentence of imprisonment and it appears to the State Government from his
antecedents and his conduct in the prison that he is likely to abstain from crime and
lead a peaceable life, if he is released from prison, the State Government may by
licence permit him to be released on condition that he be placed under the
supervision or authority of a Government Officer or of a person professing the same
religion as the prisoner, or such secular institution or such society belonging to the
same religion as the prisoner as may be recognized by the State Government for this
purpose, provided such other person, institution or society is willing to take charge of
him.” [emphasis supplied]
16. It is no doubt trite law that no convict can claim remission as a matter of right.2 However, in the
present case, the circumstances are different. What had been sought and directed by this Court
through repeated orders was not premature release itself, but due application of mind and a
reasoned decision by executive authorities in terms of existing provisions regarding premature
release. Clearly, once a law has been made by the appropriate legislature, then it is not open for
executive authorities to surreptitiously subvert its mandate. Where the authorities are found to have
failed to discharge their statutory obligations despite judicial directions, it would then not be
inappropriate for a Constitutional Court while exercising its powers of Swamy Sahraddanada v.
State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767.
Page | 9 judicial review to assume such task onto itself and direct compliance through a writ of
mandamus.
17. A perusal of the Government Orders displays that the statutory mandate on premature release
has been completely overlooked. The three−factor evaluation of (i) antecedents (ii) conduct during
incarceration and (iii) likelihood to abstain from crime, under Section 2 of the UP Prisoners Release
on Probation Act, 1938, have been given a complete go−by. These refusals are not based on facts or
evidence, and are vague, cursory, and merely unsubstantiated opinions of state authorities.
18. It would be gainsaid that length of the sentence or the gravity of the original crime can’t be the
sole basis for refusing premature release. Any assessment regarding predilection to commit crime
upon release must be based on antecedents as well as conduct of the prisoner while in jail, and not
merely on his age or apprehensions of the victims and witnesses.3 As per the State’s own affidavit,
the conduct of both petitioners has been more than satisfactory. They have no material criminal
antecedents, and have served almost 16 years in jail (22 years including remission). Although being
about 54 and 43 years old, they still have substantial years of life remaining, but that doesn’t prove
that they retain a propensity for committing Zahid Hussain v. State of West Bengal, 2001 (3) SCC
750.
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
5

Page | 10 offences. The respondent−State’s repeated and circuitous reliance on age does nothing but
defeat the purpose of remission and probation, despite the petitioners having met all statutory
requirements for premature release.
19. Indeed, the petitioners’ case is squarely covered by the ratio laid down by this Court in Shor v.
State of Uttar Pradesh4, which has later been followed in Munna v. State of Uttar Pradesh5, the
relevant extract of which is reproduced as under:
“A reading of the order dated 22.01.2018 shows that the Joint Secretary, Government
of U.P. has failed to apply his mind to the conditions of Section 2 of the U.P. Act.
Merely repeating the fact that the crime is heinous and that release of such a person
would send a negative message against the justice system in the society are factors de
hors Section 2. Conduct in prison has not been referred to at all and the Senior
Superintendent of Police and the District Magistrate confirming that the prisoner is
not “incapacitated” from committing the crime is not tantamount to stating that he is
likely to abstain from crime and lead a peaceable life if released from prison. Also
having regard to the long incarceration of 29 years (approx.) without remission, we
do not wish to drive the petitioner to a further proceeding challenging the order
dated 22.01.2018 when we find that the order has been passed mechanically and
without application of mind to Section 2 of the U.P. Act.” [emphasis supplied] 2020
SCC OnLine SC 626, ¶ 6.
Order dated 21.08.2020 in WP (Crl) 4 of 2020.
Page | 11
20. It seems to us that the petitioners’ action of kidnapping was nothing but a fanciful attempt to
procure easy money, for which they have learnt a painful life lesson. Given their age, their case
ought to be viewed through a prism of positivity. They retain the ability to re− integrate with society
and can spend many years leading a peaceful, disciplined, and normal human life. Such a hopeful
expectation is further concritised by their conduct in jail. It is revealed from the additional affidavit
dated 05.09.2020 filed by Anita @ Varnika (wife of Vikky) that during the course of his
incarceration in jail he has pursued as many as eight distance−learning courses, which include (i)
passing his Intermediate Examination, (ii) learning computer hardware, (iii) obtaining a degree in
Bachelor of Arts; as well as numerous certificates in (iv) food and nutrition, (v) human rights, (vi)
environmental studies. Vikky’s conduct shines as a bright light of hope and redemption for many
other incarcerated prisoners. Compounded by their roots and familial obligations, we believe it is
extremely unlikely that the petitioners would commit any act which could shatter or shame their
familial dreams.
21. In the present case, considering how the petitioners have served nearly two decades of
incarceration and have thus suffered the consequences of their actions; a balance between individual
and societal welfare can be struck by granting the petitioners conditional Page | 12 premature
release, subject to their continuing good conduct. This would both ensure that liberty of the
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
6

petitioners is not curtailed, nor that there is any increased threat to society. Suffice to say that this
order is not irreversible and can always be recalled in the event of any future misconduct or breach
by the petitioners. CONCLUSION
22. For the reasons stated above, the Special Leave Petitions are disposed of with a direction that the
petitioners be released on probation in terms of Section 2 of the UP Prisoners Release on Probation
Act, 1938 within a period of two weeks. The respondent− State shall be at liberty to impose
conditions as it may deem fit to balance public safety with individual liberty.
…………………………….. J.
(N.V. RAMANA) …………………………… J.
(SURYA KANT) …………………………...J. (HRISHIKESH ROY) NEW DELHI DATED : 30.09.2020
Page | 13
Satish @ Sabbe vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 30 September, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22144902/
7
