Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3
November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 813
Author: M. R. Shah
Bench: Ashok Bhushan, R. Subhash Reddy, M.R. Shah
                                                    1
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.3601 OF 2020
                           (@ Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 28150 OF 2017)
          SHRI RAM SAHU (DEAD) THROUGH LRS & ORS.                       .. Appellants
                                                 Versus
          VINOD KUMAR RAWAT & ORS.                                     ..Respondents
                                            JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1. Leave granted.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order dated 14.07.2017 passed by the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior in Review Petition No.465 of 2015 in First Appeal No.241 of
2005, by which the High Court has allowed the said review petition filed by the respondent nos. 1
and 2 herein− original defendants 16:47:00 IST Reason:
nos. 1 and 2, and has reviewed the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in
First Appeal No.241 of 2005 and has deleted the observations made in para 20 of the
said judgment and order more particularly with respect to the observations made in
para 20 as regards the possession of the disputed house, which were in favour of the
appellants − the original plaintiffs, the appellants have preferred the present appeal.
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
1

2. The relevant facts leading to the present appeal in nutshell are as under:
That one Shri Ram Sahu, the predecessor of the appellants herein instituted Civil Suit
No.04A of 2005 before the Learned Trial Court against the respondents herein −
original defendants for declaration of registered Sale Deed dated 25.03.1995 executed
by original defendant no.3 in favour of original defendant nos. 1 & 2 regarding House
No.28/955 (previous House No.3/1582), situated in Sube Ki Payga, Jiwajiganj,
Lashkar, as null and void and for permanent injunction against defendant nos. 1 & 2
restraining defendant nos. 1 & 2 from transferring the disputed property to any other
person.
2.1. That the original plaintiff Shri Ram Sahu claimed the ownership of the disputed
property on the basis of the will executed by one Chhimmabai executed in his favour
on 19.10.1993. The original plaintiff also claimed that he became the sole owner on
the death of the Chhimmabai and possession holder of the entire house and in the
same capacity; he is in continuous possession over the same. It was the case on behalf
of the defendants that the said Chhimmabai adopted defendant No.3 and later on,
she got registered the Adoption Deed on 13.05.1992 and that the original defendant
no.3 sold the disputed property in favour of the respondent nos. 1 & 2. The original
plaintiff denied the adoption of defendant no.3 by the said Chhimmabai. The written
statement was filed on behalf of the respondents. They denied that the disputed
property was the Joint Hindu Family property. Defendant nos. 1 and 2 also claimed
to be the bona fide purchasers and in possession of the suit property.
2.2. The Learned Trial Court framed the following issues:
“1. Whether, the Disputed House No.28/95 situated in Sube Ki Payga, Jiwajiganj,
Lashkar, Gwalior was purchased from the income of Joint Hindu Family of Ghasilal
and Mangaliya?
2. Whether, the wife of Ghasilal namely Chhimmabai had executed Will of aforesaid
House in favour of the Plaintiff on 19.10.1993?
3. Whether, Defendant No.3 was adopted by Ghasilal on 28.01.1985, which was got registered by
Chhimmabai on 13.05.1992.
4. Whether, Sale Deed dated 25.03.1995 regarding the disputed house was executed by Defendant
No.3 in favour of Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 without having any right?
5. Whether, the Plaintiff is entitled to get the Registered Sale Deed Dated 25.03.1995 as null and
void?
6. Whether, Plaintiff is entitled to receive Permanent Injunction against the Defendant Nos. 1 & 2
for not to sell the disputed house?
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
2

7. Whether, the Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 are entitled to receive special compensation from the Plaintiff?
If Yes, then how much?
8. Relief & Costs.” 2.3. Both the parties led the evidence, oral as well as documentary, in support of
their respective claims.
2.4. Original Plaintiff Shri Ram Sahu – appellant herein was examined as PW1. He was also cross−
examined (his deposition shall be discussed herein below). He also led the evidence in support of his
claim that he is in possession of the said property. On behalf of the defendants, defendant no.1
stepped into the witness box and through him; the defendants also produced on record the
documentary evidences.
2.5. On appreciation of the evidence, the Learned Trial Court dismissed the suit. The Learned Trial
Court disbelieved the case on behalf of plaintiff – appellant herein that Chhimmabai executed the
will in favour of the plaintiff − appellant. The Learned Trial Court held that the defence had proved
that defendant No.3 was adopted by Ghasilal on 26.01.1985 which was got registered later on by
Chhimmabai vide Adoption Deed dated 13.05.1992. 2.6. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the
Judgment and decree passed by the Learned Trial Court dismissing the suit, the original plaintiff –
appellant herein preferred First Appeal No.241 of 2005 before the High Court. That during the
pendency of the said appeal, respondent no.1 herein filed an application under section 151 C.P.C. on
19.03.2012 for dismissing the appeal and for directing the appellant herein to vacate the suit
property. That during the pendency of the appeal the original plaintiff – appellant herein filed an
application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC by which the plaintiff sought amendment in the relief
clause as regards the issuance of permanent injunction and restraining defendant nos.1 and 2 from
dispossessing the plaintiffs forcibly from the disputed house. However, the said application came to
be dismissed by the High Court on the ground of delay and latches (I.A. No.2244 of 2012). However,
while dismissing the said application the High Court granted permission to the appellants to file a
separate suit for the said relief against the defendants. Thereafter on appreciation of the evidence on
record, the High Court dismissed the said appeal preferred by the original plaintiff. However, while
dismissing the appeal the High Court also made observations as regards the possession of the
disputed house and on analysis of the deposition of PW1 and PW2 and considering the material on
record and considering the fact that during the pendency of the appeal the original defendant no.1
himself filed an application under Section 151 CPC on 02.12.2013 for getting the possession from the
plaintiff of the disputed house, which was withdrawn, the High Court made observations in regards
the possession of the plaintiffs of the disputed house. 2.7 Thereafter almost 2 years after the
judgment of the High Court in the First Appeal, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein − Original
Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 filed an application before the High Court seeking review of observations in
para 20 of the judgment as regards the possession of the disputed house. The said application was
opposed by the appellants herein. However, by the impugned order, the High Court has allowed the
review application and has ordered to delete para 20 of the Judgment and order dated 10.12.2013
passed in First Appeal No.241 of 2005, by observing that as regards the possession of the disputed
property the issue of possession was neither raised before the Learned Trial Court nor before the
First Appellate Court and even no issue with respect to possession was framed by the Learned Trial
Court. 2.8. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned order passed by the High Court in
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
3

allowing the review application and deleting para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013
passed in First Appeal No.241 of 2005, the original plaintiffs have preferred the present appeal.
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has made the
following submissions, while assailing the impugned order passed by the High Court passed in the
review application.
(i) while passing the impugned order, the High Court has exceeded in its jurisdiction,
while exercising the review jurisdiction and has acted beyond the scope and ambit of
the review jurisdiction under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC;
(ii) while exercising the review jurisdiction, the High Court ought not to have set
aside the specific finding given with respect to possession, which finding was based
on appreciation of evidence before the learned trial Court;
(iii) the High Court has committed a grave error in deleting para 20 of the final
judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No. 241/2005, in
exercise of its review jurisdiction inasmuch as, as such, there was no error apparent
on the face of the record, which was required to be corrected;
(iv) merely because the specific issue with respect to possession was not framed by
the learned trial Court, cannot be a ground to set aside the finding by the High Court,
when such finding with respect to possession was on merits and on appreciation of
the evidence before the learned trial Court;
(v) as such, the High Court has committed a grave error in considering the issues
framed in another case being Civil Suit No. 3−A/2005, which was related to House
No. 28/956 and in which the parties were also different. It is submitted that the High
Court has mis−directed itself, while considering the issues framed in Civil Suit No. 3−
A/2005, related to House No. 28/956 and not considering the issues framed in Civil
Suit No. 4−A/2005;
(vi) the High Court ought to have appreciated that the issue of possession was at large
before the learned trial Court and, in fact, the parties also led evidence with respect to
possession. It is submitted that the High Court ought to have appreciated that there
was a specific averment in the plaint as well as in the testimony of the plaintiff that he
is in possession of the suit property, i.e., House No. 28/955;
(vii) the defendants did not led any evidence with respect to possession. It is
submitted therefore that when there were specific averments and pleadings in the
plaint in regard to possession, and even the plaintiff led the evidence specifically on
the possession, non−framing of the specific issue with respect to possession would
not vitiate the finding recorded by the High Court, which was on appreciation of the
material on record. In support of his submission, learned Senior Advocate appearing
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
4

on behalf of the appellants has relied upon the following decisions of this Court, Sri
Gangai Vinayagar Temple v. Meenakshi Ammal (2015) 3 SCC 624;
Bhuwan Singh v. Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. (2009) 5 SCC 136; and Sayeda Akhtar v. Abdul
Ahad (2003) 7 SCC 52. It is submitted that all the parties were aware of the rival cases and the issue
with respect to possession was present and even the plaintiffs also led evidence on possession, non−
framing of the specific issue with respect to possession would be non−significant. It is submitted
that therefore the High Court has committed a grave error in deleting para 20 of the final judgment
and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No. 241/2005 with respect to possession mainly
on the ground that no issue was framed by the learned trial Court with respect to possession;
3.1 Learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has also taken us to the relevant
averments in the plaint as well as the written statement in regard to possession. Learned Counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants has also taken us to the testimony of the plaintiff – Shri Ram
Sahu, as well as, the deposition of one J.K. Sharma examined on behalf of the plaintiff. Learned
Senior Advocate has further submitted that there was no cross−examination by the defendants on
the point of the plaintiff’s possession. Learned Senior Advocate has also heavily relied upon the
application and affidavit dated 19.03.2012 in which the respondents in an application filed under
Section 151 of the CPC specifically prayed to direct the appellants to vacate the suit property. It is
submitted that therefore, in fact, the respondents admitted the possession of the appellants. It is
submitted that not only that, but subsequently in the month of September, 2017, the respondents
filed a suit against the appellants for decree of possession, compensation and mesne profits. It is
submitted that therefore, as such, the respondents herein specifically admitted the possession of the
appellants in the suit property; 3.2 It is further submitted that the High Court ought to have
appreciated that the review application was filed with a malafide intention faced with the
proceedings under Section 340 read with Section 195 Cr.P.C and faced with the order passed by the
learned Magistrate directing to register the case against respondent nos. 1 and 2 herein and others
under Sections 193, 465, 471 and 120−B of the IPC, dated 06.02.2016;
3.3 It is further submitted that, in fact, the appellants filed an application before the High Court
under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC (IA No. 2244/2012) to amend the plaint by adding relief for the grant of
decree of permanent injunction restraining the respondents− defendants not to dispossess them
forcibly. It is submitted that the said application was opposed by the respondents herein by
submitting that they are not threatening to dispossess the appellants during the pendency of the
suit. Therefore, the High Court dismissed the said application under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC reserving
liberty in favour of the appellants to file a separate suit for the aforesaid relief. It is submitted that
therefore, as such, the issue with respect to possession was at large even before the High Court;
3.4 Learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has also heavily relied upon the
order passed by the learned Magistrate on an application filed under Section 340 read with Section
195 Cr.P.C., in which the learned Magistrate took note of the affidavit dated 19.03.2012 filed by the
respondents and also took note of the specific observation and finding with respect to possession
made in para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013. It is submitted that there is a specific
finding given by the learned Magistrate on the respondents’ forging/creating/concocting the
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
5

documents to show their possession. It is submitted that only thereafter the learned Magistrate
directed to register the case against the respondents under Sections 193, 465, 471 and 120−B of the
IPC, under the provisions of Section 340 Cr.P.C;
3.5 It is submitted that even subsequently the suit filed by the defendants−respondents herein, filed
in the year 2017, has been dismissed by the High Court on the ground of limitation and the plaint
has been rejected in exercise of powers under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC;
3.6 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions, it is prayed to allow the
present appeal.
4. Shri Punit Jain, Learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents while opposing the
present appeal and supporting the impugned order passed by the High Court has vehemently
submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court has not committed an error
in deleting para 20 of the judgment and order dated 10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No.241 of
2005 in exercise of the review jurisdiction. 4.1 It is submitted that as such the original plaintiff filed
the suit seeking cancellation of the sale deed dated 25.03.1995 and permanent injunction to the
effect that the defendant nos. 1 & 2 (respondents herein) shall not transfer the property to any other
person. It is submitted that since no injunction from dispossession was sought and only injunction
against further transfer was sought no issue was framed in respect of possession. It is submitted that
therefore in absence of any specific issue framed by the Learned Trial Court in respect of possession
of the property and when the suit was dismissed and even thereafter the appeal also came to be
dismissed, there was no reason and/or occasion for the High Court to make any observation in
respect of possession and therefore the High Court has rightly deleted the observations made in para
20 in respect of possession. It is submitted that during the lifetime of Shri Ghisa Lal Sahu, he was in
possession of the property. After his death, his wife Smt. Chhimmabai came into possession of the
property. She continued to be in possession and after her, the adopted son – Dilip Kumar Sahu
came into possession. The issue of adoption of Shri Dilip Kumar Sahu was a subject matter of
litigation in Suit No.4A of 2001, where the said adoption and the adoption deed dated 13.05.1992
was challenged. The said suit was finally dismissed by the High Court by an order dated 07.09.2009
in SA No.315 of 2005. The will setup by the petitioner dated 19.10.1993 was also a subject matter of
suit No.45A of 2003 filed by Dilip Kumar Sahu. The said suit was decreed by a judgment dated
07.09.2009 in SA No.946 of 2005. Some parts of the property was in possession of Tenants – (i) Om
Babu Saxena and (ii) Kashmir Singh Yadav. Shri Dilip Kumar Sahu got possession from the said
tenants on 30.01.1995 by entering into compromises with them. Shri Dilip Kumar Sahu executed
sale deed dated 25.03.1995 in favour of the Respondents. Under the said sale, possession of the
property was given to the respondents. The petitioner got possession of another portion of the
property from another tenant – Parvesh Singh Jadon pursuant to a judgment and decree dated
18.10.2014. The petitioner has not shown as to how, under what capacity and when the petitioner
came into possession of the property, constructive or otherwise.
4.2 So far as the withdrawal of the application dated 02.12.2013 in I.A. No.1267 of 2012 which was
filed by the respondents is concerned, it is submitted that the said application was withdrawn since
(i) no relief could have been claimed arising out of a suit initiated by the plaintiffs and (ii) further
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
6

the portion of the property in possession of the estranged wife of the petitioner − Smt. Sheela Sahu
who was not a party to the said proceedings. 4.3 It is submitted even the application submitted by
the petitioner under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC to amend the prayer clause of permanent injunction
restraining the defendants from dispossessing the appellants forcibly from the disputed house, came
to be dismissed by the High Court, though with a permission to file a separate suit but the
petitioners had not filed any instant suit for the aforesaid reliefs.
4.4 It is submitted that therefore when the issue in respect to possession was neither before the
Learned Trial Court nor before the High Court and despite the same observations were made in para
20 in respect of possession, subsequently the same has been rightly deleted in exercise of the review
jurisdiction. It is submitted that the Court has an inherent power to correct the error if subsequently
it is bound that some of the observations were made by error.
5. By the impugned order the High Court in exercise of powers under Section 114 read with Order 47
Rule 1 CPC has allowed the review petition and has reviewed the judgment and order dated
10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No.241 of 2005 insofar as deleting the observations made in Para
20 as regards the possession of the disputed property, which were in favour of the appellants –
original plaintiffs. From the impugned order passed by the High Court, it appears that the High
Court has deleted the observations made in para 20 as regards possession of the plaintiffs
mainly/solely on the ground that the issue of possession was neither before the Learned Trial Court
nor was it before the First Appellate Court and no such issue with respect to possession was framed
by the Learned Trial Court. Therefore, the short question falls for consideration before this Court is,
whether in the facts and circumstances of the case the High Court is justified in allowing the review
application in exercise of powers under Section 114 read with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC on the aforesaid
grounds?
6. While considering the aforesaid question, the scope and ambit of the Court’s power under Section
114 read with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC is required to be considered and for that few decisions of this
Court are required to be referred to.
6.1 In the case of Haridas Das vs. Usha Rani Banik (Smt.) and Others, (2006) 4 SCC 78 while
considering the scope and ambit of Section 114 CPC read with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC it is observed
and held in paragraph 14 to 18 as under:
“14. In Meera Bhanja v. Nirmala Kumari Choudhury, (1995) 1 SCC 170 it was held
that:
“8. It is well settled that the review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have
to be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In connection
with the limitation of the powers of the court under Order 47 Rule 1, while dealing
with similar jurisdiction available to the High Court while seeking to review the
orders under Article 226 of the Constitution, this Court, in Aribam Tuleshwar
Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma, (1979) 4 SCC 389 speaking through Chinnappa
Reddy, J. has made the following pertinent observations:
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
7

‘It is true there is nothing in Article 226 of the Constitution to preclude the High
Court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary
jurisdiction to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors
committed by it. But, there are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review.
The power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and important matter
or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of
the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time when the
order was made; it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the
face of the record is found, it may also be exercised on any analogous ground. But, it
may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits. That
would be the province of a court of appeal. A power of review is not to be confused
with appellate power which may enable an appellate court to correct all manner of
errors committed by the subordinate court.’ ”
15. A perusal of Order 47 Rule 1 shows that review of a judgment or an order could be
sought: (a) from the discovery of new and important matters or evidence which after
the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant; (b) such
important matter or evidence could not be produced by the applicant at the time
when the decree was passed or order made; and (c) on account of some mistake or
error apparent on the face of the record or any other sufficient reason.
16. In Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma, AIR 1979 SC 1047, this
Court held that there are definite limits to the exercise of power of review. In that
case, an application under Order 47 Rule 1 read with Section 151 of the Code was filed
which was allowed and the order passed by the Judicial Commissioner was set aside
and the writ petition was dismissed. On an appeal to this Court it was held as under:
(SCC p. 390, para 3) “It is true as observed by this Court in Shivdeo Singh v.
State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 1909 there is nothing in Article 226 of the Constitution to preclude a
High Court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction
to prevent miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by it. But, there
are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review. The power of review may be exercised on
the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was
not within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the
time when the order was made; it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the
face of the record is found; it may also be exercised on any analogous ground. But, it may not be
exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits. That would be the province of a
court of appeal. A power of review is not to be confused with appellate powers which may enable an
appellate court to correct all manner of errors committed by the subordinate court.”
17. The judgment in Aribam case has been followed in Meera Bhanja. In that case, it has been
reiterated that an error apparent on the face of the record for acquiring jurisdiction to review must
be such an error which may strike one on a mere looking at the record and would not require any
long−drawn process of reasoning. The following observations in connection with an error apparent
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
8

on the face of the record in Satyanarayan Laxminarayan Hegde v. Millikarjun Bhavanappa
Tirumale, AIR 1960 SC 137 were also noted:
“An error which has to be established by a long−drawn process of reasoning on points
where there may conceivably be two opinions can hardly be said to be an error
apparent on the face of the record. Where an alleged error is far from self−evident
and if it can be established, it has to be established, by lengthy and complicated
arguments, such an error cannot be cured by a writ of certiorari according to the rule
governing the powers of the superior court to issue such a writ.”
18. It is also pertinent to mention the observations of this Court in Parsion Devi v. Sumitri Devi,
(1997) 8 SCC
715. Relying upon the judgments in Aribam and Meera Bhanja it was observed as under:
“9. Under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter alia if there is
a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the record. An error which is not self−
evident and has to be detected by a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be an
error apparent on the face of the record justifying the court to exercise its power of
review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction under Order 47
Rule 1 CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be ‘reheard and
corrected’. A review petition, it must be remembered has a limited purpose and
cannot be allowed to be ‘an appeal in disguise’.” 6.2 In the case of Lily Thomas vs.
Union of India, (2000) 6 SC 224, it is observed and held that the power of review can
be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute a view. Such powers can
be exercised within the limits of the statute dealing with the exercise of power.
It is further observed in the said decision that the words “any other sufficient reason” appearing in
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC must mean “a reason sufficient on grounds at least analogous to those specified
in the rule” as was held in Chhajju Ram vs. Neki, AIR 1922 PC 112 and approved by this Court in
Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos vs Most Rev. Mar Poulose Athanasius, AIR 1954 SC 526. 12.3 In the
case of Inderchand Jain vs. Motilal, (2009) 14 SCC 663 in paragraphs 7 to 11 it is observed and held
as under:
7. Section 114 of the Code of Civil Procedure (for short “the Code”) provides for a
substantive power of review by a civil court and consequently by the appellate courts.
The words “subject as aforesaid” occurring in Section 114 of the Code mean subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be prescribed as appearing in Section 113 thereof and for the said
purpose, the procedural conditions contained in Order 47 of the Code must be taken into
consideration. Section 114 of the Code although does not prescribe any limitation on the power of
the court but such limitations have been provided for in Order 47 of the Code; Rule 1 whereof reads
as under:
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
9

“17. The power of a civil court to review its judgment/decision is traceable in Section
114 CPC. The grounds on which review can be sought are enumerated in Order 47
Rule 1 CPC, which reads as under:
‘1. Application for review of judgment.—(1) Any person considering himself
aggrieved—
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal
has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and who, from the
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time
when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain
a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of
judgment of the court which passed the decree or made the order.’ ”
8. An application for review would lie inter alia when the order suffers from an error
apparent on the face of the record and permitting the same to continue would lead to
failure of justice. In Rajendra Kumar v. Rambai this Court held: (SCC p. 514, para 6)
“6. The limitations on exercise of the power of review are well settled. The first and
foremost requirement of entertaining a review petition is that the order, review of
which is sought, suffers from any error apparent on the face of the order and
permitting the order to stand will lead to failure of justice. In the absence of any such
error, finality attached to the judgment/order cannot be disturbed.”
9. The power of review can also be exercised by the court in the event discovery of
new and important matter or evidence takes place which despite exercise of due
diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by
him at the time when the order was made. An application for review would also lie if
the order has been passed on account of some mistake.
Furthermore, an application for review shall also lie for any other sufficient reason.
10. It is beyond any doubt or dispute that the review court does not sit in appeal over its own order.
A rehearing of the matter is impermissible in law. It constitutes an exception to the general rule that
once a judgment is signed or pronounced, it should not be altered. It is also trite that exercise of
inherent jurisdiction is not invoked for reviewing any order.
11. Review is not appeal in disguise. In Lily Thomas v. Union of India this Court held: (SCC p. 251,
para 56) “56. It follows, therefore, that the power of review can be exercised for correction of a
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
10

mistake but not to substitute a view. Such powers can be exercised within the limits of the statute
dealing with the exercise of power. The review cannot be treated like an appeal in disguise.”
7. The dictionary meaning of the word “review” is “the act of looking, offer something again with a
view to correction or improvement”. It cannot be denied that the review is the creation of a statute.
In the case of Patel Narshi Thakershi vs. Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji, (1971) 3 SCC 844, this
Court has held that the power of review is not an inherent power. It must be conferred by law either
specifically or by necessary implication. The review is also not an appeal in disguise.
8. What can be said to be an error apparent on the face of the proceedings has been dealt with and
considered by this Court in the case of T.C. Basappa vs. T.Nagappa, AIR 1954 SC 440. It is held that
such an error is an error which is a patent error and not a mere wrong decision. In the case of Hari
Vishnu Kamath vs. Ahmad Ishaque, AIR 1955 SC 233, it is observed as under:
“It is essential that it should be something more than a mere error; it must be one
which must be manifest on the face of the record. The real difficulty with reference to
this matter, however, is not so much in the statement of the principle as in its
application to the facts of a particular case. When does an error cease to be mere
error, and become an error apparent on the face of the record? Learned counsel on
either side were unable to suggest any clear−cut rule by which the boundary between
the two classes of errors could be demarcated.” 8.1 In the case of Parsion Devi vs.
Sumitri Devi, (Supra) in paragraph 7 to 9 it is observed and held as under:
7. It is well settled that review proceedings have to be strictly confined to the ambit
and scope of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Govt. of A.P.,
AIR 1964 SC 1372 this Court opined:
“What, however, we are now concerned with is whether the statement in the order of
September 1959 that the case did not involve any substantial question of law is an
‘error apparent on the face of the record’). The fact that on the earlier occasion the
Court held on an identical state of facts that a substantial question of law arose would
not per se be conclusive, for the earlier order itself might be erroneous. Similarly,
even if the statement was wrong, it would not follow that it was an ‘error apparent on
the face of the record’, for there is a distinction which is real, though it might not
always be capable of exposition, between a mere erroneous decision and a decision
which could be characterised as vitiated by ‘error apparent’. A review is by no means
an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected, but
lies only for patent error.”
8. Again, in Meera Bhanja v. Nirmala Kumari Choudhury, (1995) 1 SCC 170 while
quoting with approval a passage from Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak
Sharma (supra) this Court once again held that review proceedings are not by way of
an appeal and have to be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1
CPC.
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
11

9. Under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter alia if there is a mistake or an
error apparent on the face of the record. An error which is not self−evident and has to be detected by
a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record justifying
the court to exercise its power of review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction
under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be “reheard and
corrected”. A review petition, it must be remembered has a limited purpose and cannot be allowed
to be “an appeal in disguise”.
8.2 In the case of State of West Bengal and Others vs. Kamal Sengupta and Anr., (2008) 8 SCC 612,
this Court had an occasion to consider what can be said to be “mistake or error apparent on the face
of record”. In para 22 to 35 it is observed and held as under:
“22. The term “mistake or error apparent” by its very connotation signifies an error
which is evident per se from the record of the case and does not require detailed
examination, scrutiny and elucidation either of the facts or the legal position. If an
error is not self−evident and detection thereof requires long debate and process of
reasoning, it cannot be treated as an error apparent on the face of the record for the
purpose of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC or Section 22(3)(f) of the Act. To put it differently an
order or decision or judgment cannot be corrected merely because it is erroneous in
law or on the ground that a different view could have been taken by the
court/tribunal on a point of fact or law. In any case, while exercising the power of
review, the court/tribunal concerned cannot sit in appeal over its judgment/decision.
23. We may now notice some of the judicial precedents in which Section 114 read
with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC and/or Section 22(3)(f) of the Act have been interpreted
and limitations on the power of the civil court/tribunal to review its
judgment/decision have been identified.
24. In Rajah Kotagiri Venkata Subbamma Rao v. Rajah Vellanki Venkatrama Rao
(1899−1900) 27 IA 197 the Privy Council interpreted Sections 206 and 623 of the
Civil Procedure Code and observed: (IA p.205) “… Section 623 enables any of the
parties to apply for a review of any decree on the discovery of new and important
matter and evidence, which was not within his knowledge, or could not be produced
by him at the time the decree was passed, or on account of some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason. It is not
necessary to decide in this case whether the latter words should be confined to
reasons strictly ejusdem generic with those enumerated, as was held in Roy Meghraj
v. Beejoy Gobind Burral, ILR (1875) 1 Cal 197. In the opinion of Their Lordships, the
ground of amendment must at any rate be something which existed at the date of the
decree, and the section does not authorise the review of a decree which was right
when it was made on the ground of the happening of some subsequent event.”
(emphasis added)
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
12

25. In Hari Sankar Pal v. Anath Nath Mitter, 1949 FCR 36 a five−Judge Bench of the
Federal Court while considering the question whether the Calcutta High Court was
justified in not granting relief to non−appealing party, whose position was similar to
that of the successful appellant, held: (FCR p.
48) “That a decision is erroneous in law is certainly no ground for ordering review. If the court has
decided a point and decided it erroneously, the error could not be one apparent on the face of the
record or even analogous to it. When, however, the court disposes of a case without adverting to or
applying its mind to a provision of law which gives it jurisdiction to act in a particular way, that may
amount to an error analogous to one apparent on the face of the record sufficient to bring the case
within the purview of Order 47 Rule 1, Civil Procedure Code.”
26. In Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos v. Mar Poulose Athanasius (supra) this Court interpreted the
provisions contained in the Travancore Code of Civil Procedure which are analogous to Order 47
Rule 1 and observed:
“32. … Under the provisions in the Travancore Code of Civil Procedure which is
similar in terms to Order 47 Rule 1 of our Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the court of
review has only a limited jurisdiction circumscribed by the definitive limits fixed by
the language used therein.
It may allow a review on three specified grounds, namely,
(i) discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
diligence, was not within the applicant’s knowledge or could not be produced by him
at the time when the decree was passed, (ii) mistake or error apparent on the face of
the record and (iii) for any other sufficient reason.
It has been held by the Judicial Committee that the words ‘any other sufficient reason’ must mean ‘a
reason sufficient on grounds, least analogous to those specified in the rule’.”
27. In Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Govt. of A.P. (supra) it was held that a review is by no means
an appeal in disguise whereof an erroneous decision can be corrected.
28. In Parsion Devi v. Sumitri Devi (Supra) it was held as under: (SCC p. 716) “Under Order 47 Rule
1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter alia if there is a mistake or an error apparent on the
face of the record. An error which is not self−evident and has to be detected by a process of
reasoning, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the record justifying the court to
exercise its power of review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction under Order
47 Rule 1 CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be ‘reheard and corrected’. There is a
clear distinction between an erroneous decision and an error apparent on the face of the record.
While the first can be corrected by the higher forum, the latter only can be corrected by exercise of
the review jurisdiction. A review petition has a limited purpose and cannot be allowed to be ‘an
appeal in disguise’.”
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
13

29. In Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik, (supra) this Court made a reference to the Explanation
added to Order 47 by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 and held:
“13. In order to appreciate the scope of a review, Section 114 CPC has to be read, but
this section does not even adumbrate the ambit of interference expected of the court
since it merely states that it ‘may make such order thereon as it thinks fit’. The
parameters are prescribed in Order 47 CPC and for the purposes of this lis, permit the
defendant to press for a rehearing ‘on account of some mistake or error apparent on
the face of the records or for any other sufficient reason’. The former part of the rule
deals with a situation attributable to the applicant, and the latter to a jural action
which is manifestly incorrect or on which two conclusions are not possible. Neither of
them postulate a rehearing of the dispute because a party had not highlighted all the
aspects of the case or could perhaps have argued them more forcefully and/or cited
binding precedents to the court and thereby enjoyed a favourable verdict. This is
amply evident from the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order 47 which states that the fact
that the decision on a question of law on which the judgment of the court is based has
been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision of a superior court in any other
case, shall not be a ground for the review of such judgment.
Where the order in question is appealable the aggrieved party has adequate and efficacious remedy
and the court should exercise the power to review its order with the greatest circumspection.”
30. In Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma (Supra) this Court considered the scope
of the High Courts’ power to review an order passed under Article 226 of the Constitution, referred
to an earlier decision in Shivdeo Singh v. State of Punjab (Supra) and observed: (Aribam Tuleshwar
case (Supra), SCC p. 390, para 3) “3. … It is true as observed by this Court in Shivdeo Singh v. State
of Punjab (Supra), there is nothing in Article 226 of the Constitution to preclude a High Court from
exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent
miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors committed by it. But, there are
definitive limits to the exercise of the power of review. The power of review may be exercised on the
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not
within the knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time
when the order was made; it may be exercised where some mistake or error apparent on the face of
the record is found; it may also be exercised on any analogous ground. But, it may not be exercised
on the ground that the decision was erroneous on merits. That would be the province of a court of
appeal. A power of review is not to be confused with appellate powers which may enable an
appellate court to correct all manner of errors committed by the subordinate court.”
31. In K. Ajit Babu v. Union of India, (1997) 6 SCC 473, it was held that even though Order 47 Rule 1
is strictly not applicable to the tribunals, the principles contained therein have to be extended to
them, else there would be no limitation on the power of review and there would be no certainty or
finality of a decision. A slightly different view was expressed in Gopabandhu Biswal v. Krishna
Chandra Mohanty, (1998) 4 SCC 447). In that case it was held that the power of review granted to
the tribunals is similar to the power of a civil court under Order 47 Rule 1.
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
14

32. In Ajit Kumar Rath v. State of Orissa, (1999) 9 SCC 596, this Court reiterated that power of
review vested in the Tribunal is similar to the one conferred upon a civil court and held: (SCC p.
608, paras 30−31) “30. The provisions extracted above indicate that the power of review available to
the Tribunal is the same as has been given to a court under Section 114 read with Order 47 CPC. The
power is not absolute and is hedged in by the restrictions indicated in Order 47. The power can be
exercised on the application of a person on the discovery of new and important matter or evidence
which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by
him at the time when the order was made. The power can also be exercised on account of some
mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any other sufficient reason. A review
cannot be claimed or asked for merely for a fresh hearing or arguments or correction of an
erroneous view taken earlier, that is to say, the power of review can be exercised only for correction
of a patent error of law or fact which stares in the face without any elaborate argument being needed
for establishing it. It may be pointed out that the expression ‘any other sufficient reason’ used in
Order 47 Rule 1 means a reason sufficiently analogous to those specified in the Rule.
31. Any other attempt, except an attempt to correct an apparent error or an attempt not based on
any ground set out in Order 47, would amount to an abuse of the liberty given to the Tribunal under
the Act to review its judgment.”
33. In State of Haryana v. M.P. Mohla, (2007) 1 SCC 457 this Court held as under: (SCC pp. 465−66,
para 27) “27. A review petition filed by the appellants herein was not maintainable. There was no
error apparent on the face of the record. The effect of a judgment may have to be considered afresh
in a separate proceeding having regard to the subsequent cause of action which might have arisen
but the same by itself may not be a ground for filing an application for review.”
34. In Gopal Singh v. State Cadre Forest Officers’ Assn., (2007) 9 SCC 369 this Court held that after
rejecting the original application filed by the appellant, there was no justification for the Tribunal to
review its order and allow the revision of the appellant. Some of the observations made in that
judgment are extracted below: (SCC p. 387, para 40) “40. The learned counsel for the State also
pointed out that there was no necessity whatsoever on the part of the Tribunal to review its own
judgment. Even after the microscopic examination of the judgment of the Tribunal we could not find
a single reason in the whole judgment as to how the review was justified and for what reasons. No
apparent error on the face of the record was pointed, nor was it discussed. Thereby the Tribunal sat
as an appellate authority over its own judgment. This was completely impermissible and we agree
with the High Court (Sinha, J.) that the Tribunal has travelled out of its jurisdiction to write a
second order in the name of reviewing its own judgment. In fact the learned counsel for the
appellant did not address us on this very vital aspect.”
35. The principles which can be culled out from the abovenoted judgments are:
(i) The power of the Tribunal to review its order/decision under Section 22(3)(f) of
the Act is akin/analogous to the power of a civil court under Section 114 read with
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC.
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
15

(ii) The Tribunal can review its decision on either of the grounds enumerated in
Order 47 Rule 1 and not otherwise.
(iii) The expression “any other sufficient reason” appearing in Order 47 Rule 1 has to
be interpreted in the light of other specified grounds.
(iv) An error which is not self−evident and which can be discovered by a long process
of reasoning, cannot be treated as an error apparent on the face of record justifying
exercise of power under Section 22(3)(f).
(v) An erroneous order/decision cannot be corrected in the guise of exercise of power
of review.
(vi) A decision/order cannot be reviewed under Section 22(3)(f) on the basis of
subsequent decision/judgment of a coordinate or larger Bench of the tribunal or of a
superior court.
(vii) While considering an application for review, the tribunal must confine its
adjudication with reference to material which was available at the time of initial
decision.
The happening of some subsequent event or development cannot be taken note of for declaring the
initial order/decision as vitiated by an error apparent.
(viii) Mere discovery of new or important matter or evidence is not sufficient ground for review. The
party seeking review has also to show that such matter or evidence was not within its knowledge and
even after the exercise of due diligence, the same could not be produced before the court/tribunal
earlier.”
9. To appreciate the scope of review, it would be proper for this Court to discuss the object and
ambit of Section 114 CPC as the same is a substantive provision for review when a person
considering himself aggrieved either by a decree or by an order of Court from which appeal is
allowed but no appeal is preferred or where there is no provision for appeal against an order and
decree, may apply for review of the decree or order as the case may be in the Court, which may order
or pass the decree. From the bare reading of Section 114 CPC, it appears that the said substantive
power of review under Section 114 CPC has not laid down any condition as the condition precedent
in exercise of power of review nor the said Section imposed any prohibition on the Court for
exercising its power to review its decision. However, an order can be reviewed by a Court only on the
prescribed grounds mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1 CPC, which has been elaborately discussed
hereinabove. An application for review is more restricted than that of an appeal and the Court of
review has limited jurisdiction as to the definite limit mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1 CPC itself. The
powers of review cannot be exercised as an inherent power nor can an appellate power can be
exercised in the guise of power of review.
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
16

10. Considered in the light of the aforesaid settled position, we find that the High Court has clearly
overstepped the jurisdiction vested in the Court under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. No ground as envisaged
under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC has been made out for the purpose of reviewing the observations made
in para 20. It is required to be noted and as evident from para 20, the High Court made observations
in para 20 with respect to possession of the plaintiffs on appreciation of evidence on record more
particularly the deposition of the plaintiff (PW1) and his witness PW2 and on appreciation of the
evidence, the High Court found that the plaintiff is in actual possession of the said house. Therefore,
when the observation with respect to the possession of the plaintiff were made on appreciation of
evidence/material on record, it cannot be said that there was an error apparent on the face of
proceedings which were required to be reviewed in exercise of powers under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC.
At this stage, it is required to be noted that even High Court while making observations in para 20
with respect to plaintiff in possession also took note of the fact that the defendant nos. 1 and 2 –
respondents herein themselves filed an application being I.A. No.1267 of 2012 which was filed under
Section 151 CPC for getting the possession of the disputed house from the appellants and the said
application was dismissed as withdrawn. Therefore, the High Court took note of the fact that even
according to the defendant nos. 1 & 2 the appellants were in possession of the disputed house.
Therefore, in light of the fact situation, the High Court has clearly erred in deleting para 20 in
exercise of powers under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC more particularly in the light of the settled
preposition of law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions.
11. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the respondents – original defendant nos. 1 & 2 and
the reasons given by the High Court while allowing the review application and deleting para 20 that
no issue was framed by the learned Trial Court with respect to possession and/or there was no issue
before the Learned Trial Court with respect to the possession and therefore the observations made
in para 20 with respect to possession of the plaintiff – appellant herein was unwarranted and
therefore, the same was rightly deleted is concerned first of all on the aforesaid ground the powers
under Order 47 Rule 1 could not have been exercised. At the most, observations made in para 20 can
be said to be erroneous decision, though for the reasons stated herein below the same cannot be said
to be erroneous decision and as observed hereinabove the said observations were made on
appreciation of evidence on record, the aforesaid cannot be a ground to exercise of powers under
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC.
11.1 Even otherwise non−framing of the issue with respect to possession would have no bearing
and/or it fades into insignificance. It is required to be noted that there were necessary pleadings
with respect to possession in the plaint as well as in the written statement. Even the parties also led
the evidence on the possession. The original plaintiff – appellant herein led the evidence with
supporting documents to show his possession and to that, there was no cross−examination by the
defendants – respondents. The defendants − respondents did not lead any evidence to show their
possession. Therefore, the parties were aware of the rival cases. On a holistic and comprehensive
reading of the pleadings and the deposition of PW1 and PW2, it is unescapable that the plaintiff had
intendedly, directly and unequivocally raised in its pleadings the question of possession. As
observed hereinabove even in the written statement, the defendants also made an averment with
respect to possession. Thus neither prejudice was caused nor the proceedings can be said to have
been vitiated for want of framing the issue. As observed and held by this Court in the case of Sri
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
17

Gangai Vinayagar Temple vs. Meenakshi Ammal and Others, (Supra), if the parties are aware of the
rival cases, the failure to formally formulate the issue fades into insignificance when an extensive
evidence has been recorded without any demur. Even the observations made by the High Court that
there was no issue with respect to possession before the Learned Trial Court and/or even before the
High Court is not correct. As observed hereinabove in the pleadings in the plaint and even in the
written statement filed by the defendants, there were necessary averments with respect to
possession. Even the parties also led the evidence on possession.
12. Hence, on the grounds stated in the impugned order, the High Court in exercise of review
jurisdiction could not have without sufficient and just reasons reviewed its own judgment and order
and deleted the observations made in para 20 with respect to possession.
13. Even otherwise there is ample material on record to suggest/show the possession of the
appellants herein/original plaintiff. During the pendency of the appeal the respondents − original
defendant nos. 1 and 2 filed an application under Section 151 CPC for dismissing the appeal filed by
the appellant and for directing the appellant − original plaintiff to vacate the suit property. In the
said application filed on 19.03.2012 the respondents − original defendant nos. 1 & 2 never stated
that they are in possession of the disputed suit house. On the contrary, they prayed for an order
directing the appellants − original plaintiff to vacate the suit property. The said application for
whatever reasons was withdrawn. During the pendency of the appeal, the appellants filed an
application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the CPC by which the appellants sought amendment in the
relief clause as regards the issue of permanent injunction restraining the respondents − defendant
nos. 1 and 2 from dispossessing the appellants forcibly from the disputed house. The said
application was opposed by the respondents – original defendants. It was submitted that the
proposed averment is not necessary at the appellate stage as no averments have been pleaded in the
application as to why such a prayer is sought belatedly. It was also submitted that if during the
pendency of the suit the plaintiffs have neither been threatened nor have been sought to be
dispossessed of the aforesaid property such a prayer at the appellate stage may not be entertained.
The High Court dismissed the said application, not on merits but on the ground that the same was
submitted belatedly. However, the High Court dismissed the said application with the grant of
permission to file a separate suit for the aforesaid relief against the defendants. 13.1 At this stage, it
is required to be noted that after a period of approximately three years from the date of disposal of
the First Appeal 16.04.2005 by the High Court and after the impugned order dated 14.07.2017
passed by the High Court in review application, the defendant nos. 1 and 2 – respondents herein in
fact filed a separate suit in the Court of Learned Civil Judge, Class I, Gwalior against the appellants
herein for receiving possession of the disputed house and compensation, in which the possession of
the appellants has been admitted. In the said suit, it is pleaded that the plaintiffs have sent a legal
notice to the said defendants −appellants herein, through the Advocate on 09.08.2017 and
demanded to vacate the disputed place but have not vacated and handed over the possession of the
disputed place.
14. The sum and substance of the aforesaid discussion is that the High Court has committed a grave
error in allowing the review application and deleting the observations made in para 20 of its order
dated 10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No.17.04.2005 in exercise of powers under Section 114 read
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
18

with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. Under the circumstances the impugned order is unsustainable and
deserves to be quashed and set aside.
15. In view of the above and for the reasons stated hereinabove, the appeal is allowed. The above
impugned order dated 14.07.2017 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Gwalior in
Review Petition No.465 of 2015 in First Appeal No.241 of 2005 is hereby quashed and set aside and
consequently para 20 of the judgment and order 10.12.2013 passed in First Appeal No.241 of 2005 is
hereby restored.
No costs.
…………………………..J. (ASHOK BHUSHAN) …………………………..J. (M. R. SHAH) New Delhi,
November 3, 2020
Shri Ram Sahu (Dead) Through Lrs vs Vinod Kumar Rawat on 3 November, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82220204/
19
