Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ...
on 6 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 2, (2020) 1 SCALE 345 (2020) 1 SCT
627, (2020) 1 SCT 627
Author: Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench: Uday Umesh Lalit, Arun Mishra
         Civil Appeal No.5808 of 2017
         SK. MD. Rafique vs.
         Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
                                                                                        
                                                                               Reportabl
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL APPELLATE/ORIGINAL/INHERENT JURISDICTION
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO.5808 OF 2017
                         Sk. Md. Rafique                                    …Appellant
                                                      VERSUS
                         Managing Committee,
                         Contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others         …Respondents
                                                          WITH
                                                    C.A. No.6098/2017
                                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.670/2017 In SLP(C) No.6661/2016
                                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.669/2017 In SLP(C) No.6661/2016
                                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.828/2017 In SLP(C) No.6661/2016
                                                    C.A. No.5809/2017
                                                    C.A. No.5826/2017
                                                    C.A. No.5817/2017
                                                    C.A. No.5814/2017
                                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.583/2016 In SLP(C) No.6661/2016
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
1

                                                    C.A. No.5829/2017
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2020.01.06
16:36:17 IST
Reason:
                                                   W.P.(C) No.723/2016
                                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.846/2016 In SLP(C) No.6661/2016
Civil Appeal No.5808 of 2017
SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
                                                                               2
                      CONMT.PET.(C) No.1509/2017 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                                          W.P.(C) No.629/2017
                      CONMT.PET.(C) No.1798/2017 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                       CONMT.PET.(C) No.937/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                       CONMT.PET.(C) No.938/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                      CONMT.PET.(C) No.1219/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                      CONMT.PET.(C) No.1274/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                      CONMT.PET.(C) No.1669/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                   CONMT.PET.(C) No.1921-1922/2018 in C.A. No.5808/2017
                                           JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1. These appeals arise out of the Judgment and Order dated 09.12.2015 passed by the Division
Bench of the High Court 1 dismissing A.S.T. No.192 of 2014 and other connected matters and
thereby affirming the decision of the Single Judge of the High Court passed on 12.03.2014 in Writ
Petition No.20650 (W) of 2013 which in turn had found Sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 of the West Bengal
Madrasah Service Commission Act, 2008 (“the Commission Act”, for short) to be ultra vires. 1 The
High Court of Judicature at Calcutta SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
2

2. The aforementioned Writ Petition No.20650(W) of 2013 was filed by the Managing Committee of
Contai Rahmania High Madrasah challenging validity of Sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 of the Commission
Act submitting, inter alia, that by virtue of the provisions of the Commission Act, the process of
appointment of teachers in an aided Madrasah, which was recognised as a minority institution, was
taken over and entrusted to the Commission appointed under Section 4 of the Commission Act; and
that the Commission was empowered under the provisions of the Commission Act to make
recommendations which would be binding on the Managing Committee of an aided Madrasah. It
was submitted that the provisions of the Commission Act transgressed upon the rights of a minority
institution of choosing its own teachers. The submission was accepted by the Single Judge of the
High Court and the Writ Petition was allowed. Aggrieved, some of the candidates, including the
Appellant herein, whose names were recommended by the Commission to be appointed as teachers
in aided Madrasahs, filed appeal being A.S.T. No. 192 of 2014 before the Division Bench of the High
Court. C.A.N. No. 3078 of 2014 was filed by the Secretary, West Bengal Madrasah Service
Commission while M.A.T. No. 473 of 2014 was filed by State of West Bengal challenging the very
same decision of the Single Judge. All the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others appeals were dismissed by the Division Bench while
affirming the view taken by the Single Judge.
3. The decisions of the Single Judge and the Division Bench have given rise to the present set of
Appeals wherein number of Intervention Applications have also been filed.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
4. The West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education Act, 1994 was enacted to establish a Board of
Madrasah Education in West Bengal and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. The expressions “Madrasah”, “Madrasah Education”, “Managing Committee” and “Senior
Madrasah” are defined in Sections 2(f), (g), (h) and (p) as under:-
                 “2(f)      “Madrasah”       means an educational
                 institution imparting      instruction in Madrasah
                 Education;
(g) “Madrasah Education” means a system of education in which instruction is imparted in Arabic,
Islamic history and culture, and theology, and includes-
(i) High Madrasah Education System which, in addition to covering Arabic language and Islamic
history and culture, imparts general education including primary education with a view to qualifying
students for admission to a certificate, diploma or degree course instituted by SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others a University or by a
Government or by any statutory authority, and includes such other type of education as the State
Government may, in consultation with the Board, specify;
(ii) Senior Madrasah Education System which imparts instruction in Arabic language and literature,
Islamic theology, history, culture and jurisprudence and some general education with a view to
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
3

qualifying students for a certificate, diploma or degree of the Board or a University or a Government
or any other statutory authority;
(h) “Managing Committee” used in reference to an Institution means the person or the body of
persons for the time being entrusted with the management of the affairs of the Institution;
………
(p) “Senior Madrasah” means a Madrasah where the Senior Madrasah Education System is
followed.” 4.1 Chapter 2 of the Act inter alia, deals with establishment and composition of the Board
while Section 18 deals with constitution of various Committees. Section 19 then deals with functions
of the Committees as under:-
“19.Functions of Committee.-(1) It shall be the duty of the Recognition Committee to
advise the Board on all matters concerning recognition of Institutions.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Syllabus Committee to advise the Board on all matters
relating to the syllabus, courses of studies to be followed and the books to be studied
in recognised Institutions and for examinations instituted by the Board.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Examinations Committee to advise the Board on – SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(a) matters relating to selection of paper setters, moderators, tabulators, examiners,
invigilators, supervisors and others to be employed in connection with examinations
instituted by the Board and the rates of remuneration to be paid to them;
(b) the fees to be paid by candidates for such examinations; and
(c) any other matter relating to such examinations which may be referred to it by the
Board for advice (4) It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to prepare the
budget of the Board and to advise the Board on such matters relating to finance as
may be referred to it by the Board for advice.
(5) (a) All appeals by the members of the teaching and non-teaching staff against the
decisions of the Managing Committees of the recognised Institutions shall be heard
and decided by the Appeal Committee.
(b) The decisions of the Appeal Committee under clause (a) shall be final and no suit
or proceeding shall lie in any Civil or Criminal Court in respect of any matter which
has been or may be referred to, or has been decided by, the Appeal Committee.
(c) Any other Committee or Committees that may be constituted under clause (f) of
sub-section (1) of section 18 shall have such powers or functions as the Board may
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
4

confer or impose on such Committee or Committees.” 4.2 Section 20 deals with
functions of the Board as under:-
20. Functions of the Board. – (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to advise the State
Government on all matters relating to Madrasah Education referred to it by the State
Government.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others (2)
Subject to any general or special orders of the State government, the provisions of this Act and any
rules made thereunder, the Board shall have generally the power to direct, supervise and control
Madrasah Education and in particular, the power-
(a) to grant or refuse recognition to Madrasah and to withdraw such recognition if it thinks fit and
necessary, after considering the recommendations of the Recognition Committee in accordance with
such regulations as might be made in this behalf :
(b) to maintain a register of recognized Madrasahs;
(c) to provide by regulations, after considering the recommendations of the Syllabus
Committee, if any, the curriculum, syllabus, courses or studies to be followed and
books to be studied in recognized Madrasahs for examinations instituted by the
Board;
(d) to undertake, if necessary, with the approval of the State Government, the
preparation, publication or sale of text-books and other books for use in recognised
Madrasahs;
(e) to maintain and publish list of holidays for recognised Madrasahs, list of books
approved for use in recognized Madrasahs and for examinations instituted by the
Board and to remove the name of any such book from any such list;
(ee) to maintain, print and issue from time to time, the Registration Certificate,
Admit Card, Marksheet, Migration Certificate, Certificates and such other papers as it
may thinks fit;
(f) To institute various Madrasah Examinations and such other similar examinations
as it may think fit and to make regulations in this behalf;
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(g) to set down the conditions to be fulfilled by the candidates presenting themselves for
examinations instituted by the Board;
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
5

(h) to provide by regulations after considering the recommendations of the Examinations
Committee, if any, the rates of remuneration’ to be paid to the paper-setters, moderators, tabulators,
examiners. invigilators, supervisors and others employed in connection with the examinations
instituted by the Board, and, the fees to be paid by candidates for such examinations with the
approval of the State Government;
(i) to grant or refuse permission to candidates to appear at examinations instituted by the Board and
to withdraw such permission if it thinks fit in accordance with such regulations as may be made in
this behalf;
(j) to provide by regulations the procedure for filling and disposal of appeals by the members of the
teaching and non-teaching staff against the decisions of the Managing Committees of recognized
Madrasahs;
(k) to administer the West Bengal Madrasah Education Board Fund;
(l) to institute and administer such Provident Funds as may be prescribed;
(m) to make regulations relating to the conduct, discipline and appeal in respect of the members of
the staff ;
(mm) to make regulations relating to conduct and discipline in respect of teachers and non-teaching
staff of the recognised Institutions under the Board;
(mmm) to make regulations determining SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others the qualification for, and the method of, recruitment of
teachers in class I to class IV of the Senior Madrasah;
(n) to perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Government.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). the Board shall have power to make regulations in
respect of any matter for the proper exercise of its powers under this Act.
Provided that any decision or action taken or any order made by the Board in the discharge of its
functions under this Act shall not be invalid merely on the ground that no regulation has been made
under this sub-section.
(4) No regulation shall be valid unless it is approved by the State Government and the State
Government may, in accordance with such approval, make such additions, alterations or
modifications therein as it thinks fit:
Provided that before making any such addition, alteration or modification, the State
Government shall give the Board an opportunity to express its views thereon within
such period, not exceeding one month, as may be specified by the State Government.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
6

(5) All regulations approved by the State Government shall be published in the
Official Gazette.”
5. The West Bengal Minorities’ Commission Act, 1996 was enacted to constitute a Minorities
Commission to study and suggest additional social, economic, educational and cultural
requirements of religious and linguistic minorities of West Bengal with a view to equipping them to
preserve secular traditions of West Bengal and to promote national SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others integration. Section 3 deals with
Constitution of the West Bengal Minorities’ Commission and sub Sections (1) and (3) of Section 4
are as under:-
“4. Functions of the Commission.– (1) The Commission shall perform the following
functions:-
(a) evaluate the progress of the development of minorities of West Bengal and review
implementation of the policies and. programme of the State Government;
(b) monitor the working of the safeguards provided in the Constitution and in laws
enacted by Parliament or the State Legislature;
(c) make recommendations for the effective enforcement and implementation of
safeguards for the protection of the interests of minorities provided by the Central
Government or the State Government;
(d) look into specific complaints regarding deprivation of social, economic,
educational, cultural and linguistic rights and safeguards of the minorities and take
up such matters with the-appropriate authorities;
(e) recommend to the State Government to accord minority status to religious,
linguistic and ethnic groups, provided such groups do not enjoy any constitutional or
statutory benefits or status;
(f) cause studies to be undertaken into problems arising out of any discrimination
against minorities and recommend measures for their removal;
(g) conduct studies, research and analysis on the issues relating to socio-economic
and educational development of minorities;
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(h) make annual report to the State Government on any matter pertaining to any of the functions of
the Commission under this section.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
7

… … (3) The advice of the Commission and, especially, the findings of the Commission concerning
deprivation of any right of the minority or any infringement of any well-being of the minority by
omission or commission, shall ordinarily be binding upon the State Government.”
6. The West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997 (“1997 Act”, for short) was enacted to
provide for the constitution of Regional School Service Commissions and a Central School Service
Commission in the State and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The definitions
of “School” and “Teacher” in Section 2(n) and (p) are as under:-
“(n) “school” means a recognized non-Government aided –
(i) secondary school, or educational institution, or part or department of such school
or institution, imparting instruction in a secondary education or
(ii) higher Secondary school, or educational institution (other than a college), or part
or department of such school or institution, imparting instruction in higher
secondary education, or and includes a sponsored school.
Explanation I –“Recognized” with its grammatical variations, used with reference to a school, shall
mean – SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(a) recognized or deemed to have been recognized under the West Bengal Board of Secondary
Education Act, 1963 or
(b) recognized under the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education Act, 1975,
Explanation II – “Aided” with its grammatical variations, used with reference to a school, shall
mean aided by the State Government in the shape of financial assistance towards the basic pay of
the teachers of that school.
Explanation III – “Basic pay” shall mean the monthly pay of a teacher of a school which corresponds
to a stage in the time-scale of pay of the post, held by the teacher in that school.
Explanation IV – “Secondary Education” shall have the same meaning as in clause (1) of section 2 of
the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963.
Explanation V – “Higher Secondary Education” shall have the same meaning as in clause (d) of
section 2 of the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education Act, 1975.
Explanation VI – “Sponsored School” shall mean a school declared as a sponsored school by the
State Government by notification.
(p) “Teacher” means an Assistant Teacher or any other person, holding a teaching post of a school
and recognized as such by the Board or the Council or the Board of Madrasah, as the case may be,
and includes the Headmaster or the Headmistress 2(but shall not include the Assistant Headmaster
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
8

or the Assistant Headmistress or the Teacher holding a post against short-term vacancy caused by
deputation, leave or lien).” 2 The words within brackets were inserted by the West Bengal School
Service Commission (Second Amendment) Act, 2001.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others 6.1
Section 3 deals with constitution of the Commission and Regional Commissions. Section 4(4)
dealing with composition of Chairman is as under:
“(4) (a) The office of the Chairman shall be whole-time; the other members shall be
honorary.
(b) The Chairman and other members shall hold office for a term of four years 3[but
in the case of ex officio member such term shall be one year]:
(c) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this sub-
section, the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall be such
as may be prescribed.” 6.2 Sections 7 and 9 are as under:-
“7. Functions of Regional Commission. – Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force or in any contract, custom or usage to the
contrary, it shall be the duty of the Regional Commission to recommend persons for
appointment to the posts of Teachers or non-teaching staff in school within its
territorial jurisdiction under he supervision and control of the Central Commission
on the basis of the result of the State Level Selection Test conducted by the Central
Commission.
9. Effect of recommendation of Commission – (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, custom or
usage to the contrary, appointments to the posts of Teachers and non-teaching staff
in school shall be made by the Board or the ad-hoc committee or the administrator of
the Board on the recommendation of the Regional Commission having jurisdiction.
(2) Any appointment of a Teacher or a non-teaching staff made on or after the commencement of
this Act 3 Words ins. By W.B. Act 5 of 2001.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others in
contravention of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid and shall have no effect and the Teacher
or the non-teaching staff so appointed shall not be a Teacher or a non-teaching staff within the
meaning of clause
(p) or clause (ia) of section 2, as the case may be.” 6.3 Sub-sections (a) and (b) of Section 15,
however, stipulated as under:
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
9

“15. Act not to apply in relation to certain schools:-
The provisions of this Act shall not apply to-
(a) a school established and administered by a minority, whether based on religion or
language, or
(b) a school under any trust, established and administered by a minority, whether
based on religion or language, or … … … ”
7. By notification issued on 12.10.2007, Government of West Bengal, Minorities Development and
Welfare and Madrasah Education Department declared and granted to all recognised and aided
Madrasahs under the control of the Government the status of “Minority Educational Institutions”.
The text of the Notification was as under:-
“Government of West Bengal Minorities Development & Welfare & Madrasah
Education Department Writers’ Buildings, Kolkata – 700001 No.1465-MD/07 Dated:
12.10.07 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others NOTIFICATION WHEREAS Muslim recognised as Minority
Community in the State of West Bengal and minorities have the right under Article
30 of the Constitution of India to establish and administer educational institution of
their choice;
AND WHEREAS the State Government is competent to declare a particular
institution as a minority institution and till such time the government issue an order
declaring that it is a minority institution they can not operate as Minority
Institutions;
AND WHEREAS the Supreme Court has held that the Government are the
Competent Authority to verify and determine the minority status of an Educational
Institution for the purpose of Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India;
AND WEHREAS the Govt. recognised Madrasahs including Hooghly Govt. Madrasah
and the Calcutta Madrasah were originally established by the Muslim minority and
continuously administered by the members of that minority to subserve and promote
the interests of the minority community concerned;
AND WEHREAS the abovesaid Madrasahs were, in course of times, recognised
alongwith liabilities by the Government for promoting educational interests of the
Muslim minority and on verification it has been ascertained that more than 90%
students are pursuing their studies in these institutions and these Madrasahs are
functioning under supervision of the W.B. Madrasah Board constituted with member
representatives of the Minority Community concerned.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
10

AND WHEREAS the State Govt. having been satisfied about the above antecedents of
all the recognised Madrasahs which are aided and guided by the Government
prescribed guidelines relating to admissions, selections etc. and about their
continuing SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others and sustained functioning for promoting the interests of the
concerned minority have become satisfied that these institutions are fit to enjoy
minority status of an Educational Institution for the purpose of Article 30(1) of the
Constitution of India.
AND WHEREAS the Govt. in the State of West Bengal have also considered
expedients to declare these recognized and aided Madrasahs and those which will be
so recognised and aided as such in future as Minority Educational Institution.
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with the above considerations and in pursuance
of the Article 30 of the Constitution of India the Government is pleased, hereby, to
declare that all the recognised and aided Madrasahs under control of this
Government and those Madrasahs which will be recognised on similar lines in future,
as Minority Educational Institutions. These institutions will also be allowed, in
consequence to have the following effects as agreed upon by the State Government.
i) They will continue to get financial assistance as before from the State Government
ii) Reservation policy for employment etc. shall not apply in case of appointment of
teachers and non-teaching staff in these Madrasahs.
iii) Selection of teachers may continue to be done by West Bengal School Service
Commission through separate panel.
By order of the Governor (Pawan Agawal) Secretary to the Govt. of West Bengal”
8. Consequent to the aforesaid notification dated 12.10.2007 conferring status of “Minority
Educational Institutions” on all recognised and Government aided Madrasahs, another notification
was issued on SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others 28.12.2007 by the Government of West Bengal, Minorities’ Development & Welfare and
Madrasah Education Department stating that after being conferred such status “the matter of
selection of teachers for recognised and aided Madrasahs of this State has gone out of the purview of
the existing West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997”.
9. The Commission Act was thereafter enacted to provide for the constitution of Madrasah Service
Commission in the State and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Statement of
Objects and Reasons in relation to the Commission Act was as under:-
“With the declaration of recognised madrasahs as minority educational institutions
by the State Government recently, the West Bengal School Service Commission
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
11

cannot recommend panel of teachers for recognised madrasahs as per provisions of
Section 15 of the West Bengal School Service Commission Act, 1997 (West Bengal Act
IV of 1997). Therefore, a need has arisen for setting up of a separate body for
recommending panel of teachers for appointment in Recognised Non-Government
Aided Madrasahs. In view of this, it has been decided to set up the West Begal
Madrasah Service Commission.
2. The proposed Commission would ensure the preparation of panel of teachers by
recruitment in free, fair and transparent manner with a quality education for
madrasahs.
3. The said Commission would also take into consideration the special requirement of
teachers in the madrasahs system in the State.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
4. The Bill has been framed with the above objects in view.” 9.1 The expressions “Madrasah”,
“Teacher” and “vacant post” are defined in Section 2(k), (s) and (t) respectively under the
Commission Act as under:-
“(k) “Madrasah” means a Recognised Non- Government Aided Senior Madrasah,
Junior High Madrasah, High Madrasah or Higher Secondary Madrasah imparting
instruction in-
(i) High Madrasah Education System within the meaning of sub-clause (i)
(ii) Senior Madrasah Education System within the meaning of sub-clause(ii), of
clause (g) of Section 2 of the West Bengal Board of Madrasah Education Act, 1994; or
(iii) Higher Secondary Education;
Explanation1. – “recognised” with its grammatical variations, used with reference to a Madrasah,
shall mean-
(a) Recognized or deemed to have been reconized under the West Bengal Board of Madrasah
Education Act, 1994, or
(b) Recognized under the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education Act, Explanation II.
– “Aided” with its grammatical variations, used with reference to a Madrasah, shall mean aided by
the State Government in the shape of financial assistance towards basic pay of the teachers of
Madrasah.
Explanation III. – “basic pay” shall mean the monthly pay of a teacher of a Madrasah which
corresponds to SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
12

Others a stage in the timescale of pay of the post held by the teacher in that madrasah, Explanation
IV.- “Madrasah Education” shall have the same meaning as in clause (g) of section 2 of the West
Bengal Board of Madrasah Education Act, 1994;
Explanation V.- “Higher Secondary Education” shall have the same meaning as in clause (d) of
section 2 of the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education Act, 1975.
(s) “Teacher” means an Assistant Teacher, or any other person holding a teaching post of a
madrasah recognised as such by the Board or the Council, as the case may be, and shall include the
headmaster, the Headmistress or the Superintendent.
(t) “vacant post” means a vacancy, caused by–
(i) creation of new post by the State Government, or
(ii) retirement, death, resignation, removal or dismissal of any person from the post of teacher, the
post having been sanctioned by the Competent authority or the State Government, but shall not
include a short-term vacancy due to deputation, leave or lien and that of a part time post or the post
of Assistant Headmaster or Assistant Headmistress.” 9.2 Section 4 deals with composition of the
Commission and is to the following effect:-
“4. (i) The Commission shall consist of one Chairman and four members.
(ii) The Chairman shall be an eminent educationist having profound knowledge in
Islamic Culture and well-versed in education and teaching experience, either as a
teacher of a university, or as a Principal of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others a college, for a period of not less than
twelve years, or as a teacher, other than Principal of a college, for a period of not less
than fifteen years, or an officer of the State Government not below the rank of Joint
Secretary.
(iii) Of the four members under sub-section (1), one shall be a person who, not being
an educationist, occupies or has occupied, in the opinion of the State Government, a
position of eminence in public life or in Legal or Administrative service, one shall be
an eminent educationist having profound knowledge in Islamic Theology and
Culture, and the others shall have teaching experience, either as a teacher of a
university, or as a Principal of a college, for a period of not less than ten years, or as a
teacher, other than Principal of a college, or as a Headmaster or Headmistress or
Superintendent of a Madrasah, for a period of not less than fifteen years.” 9.3
Sections 8, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 18 of the Commission Act are as under:-
“8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force
or in any contract, custom or usage to the contrary, it shall be the duty of the
Commission to select and recommend persons to be appointed to the vacant posts of
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
13

teachers in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
…
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or any contract,
custom or usage to the contrary, the Managing Committee, the ad hoc Committee or the
Administrator, as the case may be, shall be bound to appoint the candidate recommended by the
Commission to the post of teacher in the Madrasah concerned as per vacancy report.
Provided that in the absence of the Managing Committee, ad hoc Committee or the Administrator,
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others the Head
Master or the Headmistress or the Teacher- In-charge is empowered to issue appointment letter to
the candidate recommended by the Commission. Such matter should be ratified at the next available
meeting of the Managing Committee, ad hoc Committee or by the Administrator, as the case may be:
Provided further that the Managing Committee, ad hoc Committee, the
Administrator or the Headmaster or the Headmistress or the Teacher-in-charge as
the case may be, shall, if any error is detected in the recommendation, immediately
bring it to the notice of the Commission for removal of such error.
11. Any appointment of a teacher made on or after the commencement of this Act in contravention
of the provision of this Act shall be invalid and shall have no effect and teacher so appointed shall
not be a teacher within the meaning of clause (s) of Section 2.
12. (i) If the Managing Committee, the ad hoc Committee or the Administrator of a Madrasah, as the
case may be, refuses, fails or delays to issue appointment letter to the candidate recommended by
the Commission within the period stipulated in the letter of recommendation by the Commission,
without any reasonable ground, the State Government may direct the Board to dissolve the
Managing Committee or the ad hoc Committee, or discharge the Administrator, as the case may be,
or stop all financial assistance to such Madrasah recording reasons thereof and may also issue
direction upon the Board or Council, as the case be, to withdraw recognition or affiliation of such
Madrasah.
(ii) In case of failure to issue appointment letter to the candidate recommended by the Commission
is on the part of the Superintendent, the Headmaster, the Headmistress or the Teacher-in-charge of
a Madrasah, he shall be subject to such disciplinary proceedings as may be prescribed.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
13. Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the terms and conditions of service of
teachers in the employment of a Madrasah immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall
not be varied to the disadvantage of such teachers in so far as such terms and conditions relate to
the appointment of such teachers to the posts held by them immediately before the commencement
of this Act.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
14

… … …
18. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters:-
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members under
section 5;
(b) the manner in which an inquiry is to be made for removal of the Chairman or any
member under section 6;
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary under section 7;
(d) the manner and scope of selection of persons for appointment to the posts of
teachers under section 9;
(e) any other matter which may be, or is required to be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.”
10. The West Bengal Madrasah Service Commission (Amendment) Act, 2010 made
certain amendments in the Commission Act. Section 2 of the Amendment Act is to
the following effect:-
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others “2. In section 8 of the West Bengal Madrasah Service Commission Act, 2008
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words “or the Non-teaching
staff’, the words “and also to recommend the transfer including mutual transfer of the
teachers of the Non- teaching staff’ shall be inserted.”
11. In exercise of power conferred by the provisions of the Commission Act, the West
Bengal Madrasah Service Commission Recruitment (selection and recommendation
of persons for appointment and transfer to the posts of teaching and non-teaching
staff) Rules, 2010 (“2010 Rules”, for short) were promulgated. Chapter-III of 2010
Rules deals with subject “Scope, Method and Manner of Selection” and Rule 8 is to
the following effect:-
“8. Manner of selection – (1) Selection to any post shall be made on the basis of
results of the State/Region/Area Level Selection Test, as may be decided by the
Commission, which may comprise any, some or all of the following (as the case may
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
15

be) –
a) Written Examination
b) Evaluation of Qualification
c) Personality Test
d) Aptitude Test of the candidates, as the case may be, in the manner as specified in
Schedule III (2) The Commission may, in its discretion, fix the minimum qualifying
marks to be scored/obtained by the candidates in written examination or in
aggregate or in both and relax the qualifying marks on reasonable ground(s) to be
recorded in writing ….” SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others RIVAL SUBMISSIONS:
12. In accordance with the provisions of the Commission Act and 2010 Rules, the
Madrasah Service Commission kept making recommendations against vacant posts
which had arisen from time to time. Various candidates were appointed as teachers.
However, a challenge was raised by the Respondent No.1 by filing Writ Petition
No.20650(W) of 2013 as stated hereinabove. It was submitted that in terms of
Section 10 of the Commission Act, the Managing Committee or the Administrator
would be bound to appoint the candidates recommended by the Madrasah Service
Commission and the consequence of not following such recommendation would visit
penalty as provided for in Section 12; and that if the Writ Petitioner, as a minority
institution, was entitled to administer institution of its choice, it would have a
corresponding right to select teachers on its own and that any deprivation of such
right would be violative of the Right conferred by Article 30 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, it was submitted on behalf of the State that under the provisions of the
Commission Act, the Commission would merely select and recommend teachers and non-teaching
staff of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
Madrasahs but the appointment would be given by the concerned institution and the overall control
of the Managing Committees of the concerned institutes in respect of such staff was not taken away
by the Respondents and the day-to-day administration of the Madrasahs was not interfered with. It
was further submitted that the number of Madrasahs in the State was 614 and the Madrashs
imparted education in accordance with the syllabus prescribed by the competent authority in
respect of all subjects, except Arabic and Urdu; that most of the Madrasahs were located in the
remote areas of the State and the student population taking education in these Madrasahs was about
5,00,000. The submission was that the State was rendering necessary aid and help to the Managing
Committees in finding good quality teachers as per qualifications prescribed by the National Council
for Teacher Education for imparting quality education to the students and the whole purpose behind
the legislation was to provide the students with good quality teaching. The submission was
paraphrased by the Single Judge as under:-
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
16

“For the respondents there are primarily two grounds justifying the relevant
provisions of such a legislation. First, the concerned Madrasah is fully aided for its
financial requirements which is fulfilled by the State Government. Therefore, it is
bound to follow recruitment procedures for fair and comparative selection of
teachers. Secondly, in terms of the provisions of the impugned Act the Commission
merely selects and recommends a teacher but overall control of such staff lies with
the Managing SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others Committee where the government does not interfere. Thus the
role of the Commission is that of a mere recommendatory body appointed by the
government.” DECISIONS OF THE HIGH COURT IN THE PRESENT APPEALS
13. Relying on the decisions of this Court in State of Kerala, etc vs. Very Rev. Mother
Provincial, etc4 and Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society and Another vs. State of
Gujarat and Another5 the Single Judge observed:-
“The Supreme Court has also held that the right to administer an institution is
primarily to consist of four principal aspects. First, the right to chose its managing or
governing body. It is said that the founders of the minority institution have faith and
confidence in their committee or body consisting of persons selected by them.
Secondly, the right to choose its teachers having compatibility with their ideals, aims
and aspirations. Third is the right not to be compelled to refuse admission to the
students. Fourthly, the right to use its properties and assets for the benefit of its
institution. This judgment thus unambiguously recognizes that the right to select its
teachers is a part of the right to administer an institution which Article 30 has
conferred on it. The reasons for that has also been very clearly explained in the
judgment … … …” 4 (1970) 2 SCC 417 5 (1974) 1 SCC 717 SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others 13.1 The Single
Judge relied upon the decisions of this Court in Secretary, Malankara Syrian Catholic
vs. T. Jose and others 6 and Sindhi Education Society and another vs. Chief
Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi and others7 and posed following question:-
“That regulatory measures are permissible to a limited extent has been judicially
accepted. But does the provision impugned in this legislation qualify for being passed
as a regulatory measure? In view of the well defined parameters of the regulatory
measures can it be said that taking away the right of selection of teachers from the
jurisdiction of the petitioners is also an act to regulate the affairs of the Madrasah and
not to interfere with its administration? Answers to these queries are essentially
related to a resolution of the present dispute.” 13.2 Further, after referring to the
decision in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 the Single Judge observed:-
“… …The State can prescribe regulations to ensure the excellence of the institution.
Prescription of standards for educational institutions does not militate against the
right of the minority to administer the institutions. Regulations made in the true
interest of efficiency of instructions, discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
17

order and the like may undoubtedly be imposed. It has been specifically laid down
hat such regulations are not restrictions on the subsistence of the right which is
guaranteed. On the other hand, they secure the proper functioning of the institution
in matters of education. The minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the
standards of excellence expected of an educational 6 (2007) 1 SCC 386 7 (2010) 8
SCC 49 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others institution or under the guise of exclusive right of management
to decline to follow the general patern.” 13.3. The Single Judge then concluded:-
“Thus, I find that the impugned provisions of the Act tend to take away the protected
right conferred upon the minorities to administer institutions according to their
choice. The right of the Commission to select and recommend teachers for these
institutions in a very major way interferes with the right to administer those
institutions rendering a constitutional mandate virtually ineffective. The perception
of a prevailing social reality cannot circuitously circumvent a constitutional
protection.
The impugned provisions of the Act are thus not only not in consonance with the
protection guaranteed by the Constitution but are definitely in derogation thereof.
Section 8 of the Act cannot be read in isolation. Read with the subsequent provisions
there is an element of compulsion in the effect of the recommendation made by the
Commission which is really against the freedom guaranteed in Article 30 of the
Constitution of India. Section 8 of the said Act is hereby declared ultra vires the
Constitution. In view of what has been discussed before the prayer of the petitioner is
moulded and Sections 10, 11 and 12 of the act are also declared ultra vires the
Constitution.”
14. The challenge raised by the Commission, by the State as well as by the teachers
who were recommended under the provisions of the Commission Act was rejected by
the Division Bench of the High Court, while accepting the view taken by the Single
Judge. The Division Bench observed:-
“The present enactment is sought to be defended by the State on the ground of
funding the institutions and opinion that it is only recommendatory process and not
interference with the overall administration of the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others institutions. We are afraid
whatever by the nature of recommendations it would definitely touch upon the
administrative authority or control to be exercised by the minority institutions while
administering their institutions in every aspect and respect since institutions would
not have the option to choose individuals beyond the recommendations so made.
Hence, the scheme of the Act instead of being regulatory, prohibits the freedom of
minority institutions in selecting its own personnel. It is one thing to regulate the
process of appointment by providing guidelines etc. it is however entirely different to
clog the right of choice of the minority institution by prohibiting them to choose any
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
18

candidate otherwise eligible except from those recommended by the Commission.
Since appointment of teachers etc. is very relevant so far as the quality of education is
concerned, if there are any mala fides statutory infirmities brought to the notice of
the State Government as it is completely funded by the State Government, it is open
to the State Government to withdraw financial support if mala fides/illegalities are
found in such process of selection of teaching staff etc. Such right is always with the
State Government irrespective of minority institutions or other institutions.
So far as the present enactment is concerned, we cannot deviate from the opinion of
the learned Single Judge that such act is nothing but violation of the Fundamental
Rights guaranteed by the Constitution in terms of Article 29 and 30 of the
Constitution of India. Therefore, we decline to interfere with the opinion expressed
by the learned Single Judge and accordingly appeals deserve to be dismissed.
We have also heard the submissions made by the learned Counsel who are appearing
for some of the teachers who are already appointed and are in service for the last five
years or waiting for the appointment of teachers as empanelled in the list.
Since the Act of 2008, according to us is nothing but violation of the Fundamental
Rights guaranteed SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others by the Constitution to the minority institutions, it is
exclusively left to the concerned Madrasahs either to accept contention of such
teachers, who are already in service and permit them to continue in service and/or to
provide appointment to the candidates who are empanelled by the Commission
awaiting such appointment.
With these observations, the appeals are disposed of along with the connection
applications.”
15. We heard Mr. Mohan Parasaran, Mr. Kalyan Banerjee, Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi, Mr.
Jayant Bhushan, Mr. Jaideep Gupta, Mr. Salman Khursheed and Mr. P.S. Patwalia,
learned Senior Advocates appearing for various parties and other learned Advocates
who took us through the relevant decisions holding the field and also invited our
attention to various statutory provisions. Since the submissions, to a certain extent,
were over lapping, we are not dealing with the submissions advanced by the learned
Counsel individually.
16. The basic issues which arise for consideration are whether the provisions, namely,
Sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 of the Commission Act are ultra vires as held by the High
Court and whether these provisions transgress the right of minority institutions
guaranteed under the Constitution of India. Before we deal with the basic issues
raised in these appeals, the various decisions touching upon the extent of rights of
minority institutions as guaranteed by the Constitution, need to be adverted SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others to.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
19

Since the decision of this Court in TMA Pai Foundation and others vs. State of
Karnataka and others8 was rendered by a Bench of Eleven Judges, we have divided
the discussion under three headings covering relevant decisions:-
A) Decisions upto TMA Pai Foundation;
B) Decision in TMA Pai Foundation; and C) Decisions after TMA Pai Foundation.
A) Decisions upto TMA Pai Foundation
17. In Re: The Kerala Education Bill, 19579, a seven Judge Bench of this Court dealt
with a reference made by the President of India under Article 143(1) of the
Constitution in respect of the Kerala Education Bill, 1957. Some of the salient features
of the Bill were paraphrased in the majority opinion delivered by S.R. Das, C.J. and
insofar as the present case is concerned, the relevant discussion was:-
“Clause 9 makes it obligatory on the Government to pay the salary of all teachers in
aided schools direct or through the headmaster of the school and also to pay the
salary of the non-teaching staff of the aided schools. It gives power to the
Government to prescribe the number of persons to be appointed in the non-teaching
establishment of aided schools, their salaries, qualifications and other conditions of
service. The Government is authorised, under sub-clause (3), to pay to the manager a
maintenance grant at such 8 (2002) 8 SCC 481 9 (1959) SCR 995 SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others rates as may be
prescribed and under sub-clause (4) to make grants-in-aid for the purchase,
improvement and repairs of any land, building or equipment of an aided school.
Clause 10 requires Government to prescribe the qualifications to be possessed by
persons for appointment as teachers in Government schools and in private schools
which, by the definition, means aided or recognised schools. The State Public Service
Commission is empowered to select candidates for appointment as teachers in
Government and aided schools according to the procedure laid down in clause 11.
Shortly put, the procedure is that before the 31st May of each year the Public Service
Commission shall select for each district separately candidates with due regard to the
probable number of vacancies of teachers that may arise in the course of the year,
that the list of candidates so selected shall be published in the Gazette and that the
manager shall appoint teachers of aided schools only from the candidates so selected
for the district in which the school is located subject to the proviso that the manager
may, for sufficient reason, with the permission of the Commission, appoint teachers
selected for any other district. Appointment of teachers in Government schools are
also to be made from the list of candidates so published. In selecting candidates the
Commission is to have regard to the provisions made by the Government under
clause (4) of Art. 16 of the Constitution, that is to say, give representation in the
educational service to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Tribes–a
provision which has been severely criticised by learned counsel appearing for the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
20

Anglo-Indian and Muslim communities.” (Emphasis supplied)
17. 1 The grievance as raised was set out as under:-
“Their grievances are thus stated : The gist of the right of administration of a school is
the power of appointment, control and dismissal of teachers and other staff. But
under the said Bill such power of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others management is practically taken away. Thus
the manager must submit annual statements (cl. 5). The fixed assets of the aided
schools are frozen and cannot be dealt with except with the permission of the
authorised officer (cl. 6). No educational agency of an aided school can appoint a
manager of its choice and the manager is completely under the control of the
authorised officer, for he must keep accounts in the manner he is told to do and give
periodical inspection of them, and on the closure of the school the accounts must be
made over to the authorised officer (cl. 7). All fees etc. collected will have to be made
over to the Government (cl. 8(3)). Government will take up the task of paying the
teachers and the non-teaching staff (clause 9). Government will prescribe the
qualification of teachers (clause 10). The school authorities cannot appoint a single
teacher of their choice, but must appoint persons out of the panel settled by the
Public Service Commission (clause 11). The school authorities must provide
amenities to teachers and cannot dismiss, remove, reduce or even suspend a teacher
without the previous sanction of the authorised officer (clause 12).
(Emphasis supplied)
17. 2 The majority opinion observed:-
“We are thus faced with a problem of considerable complexity apparently difficult of
solution. There is, on the one hand the minority rights under Art. 30(1) to establish
and administer educational institutions of their choice and the duty of the
Government to promote education, there is, on the other side the obligation of the
State under Art. 45 to endeavour to introduce free and compulsory education. We
have to reconcile between these two conflicting interests and to give effect to both if
that is possible and bring about a synthesis between the two. The directive principles
cannot ignore or override the fundamental rights but must, as we have said, subserve
the fundamental rights. We have already observed that Art. 30(1) gives two rights to
the minorities, (1) to establish and (2) to administer, educational SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others institutions of
their choice. The right to administer cannot obviously include the right to
mal-administer. The minority cannot surely ask for aid or recognition for an
educational institution run by them in unhealthy surroundings, without any
competent teachers, possessing any semblance of qualification, and which does not
maintain even a fair standard of teaching or which teaches matters subversive of the
welfare of the scholars. It stands to reason, then, that the constitutional right to
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
21

administer an educational institution of their choice does not necessarily militate
against the claim of the State to insist that in order to grant aid the State may
prescribe reasonable regulations to ensure the excellence of the institutions to be
aided. Learned Attorney-General concedes that reasonable regulations may certainly
be imposed by the State as a condition for aid or even for recognition….” “…..Clauses
6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 20 relate to the management of aided schools. Some of
these provisions, e.g., 7, 10, 11(1), 12(1)(2)(3) and (5) may easily be regarded as
reasonable regulations or conditions for the grant of aid. Clauses 9, 11(2) and 12(4)
are, however, objected to as going much beyond the permissible limit. It is said that
by taking over the collections of fees, etc., and by undertaking to pay the salaries of
the teachers and other staff the Government is in reality confiscating the school fund
and taking away the prestige of the school, for none will care for the school authority.
Likewise clause 11 takes away an obvious item of management, for the manager
cannot appoint any teacher at all except out of the panel to be prepared by the Public
Service Commission, which, apart from the question of its power of taking up such
duties, may not be qualified at all to select teachers who will be acceptable to religious
denominations and in particular sub-clause (2) of that clause is objectionable for it
thrusts upon educational institutions of religious minorities teachers of Scheduled
Castes who may have no knowledge of the tenets of their religion and may be
otherwise weak educationally. Power of dismissal, removal, reduction in rank or
suspension is an index SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others of the right of management and that is taken away by
clause 12(4). These are, no doubt, serious inroads on the right of administration and
appear perilously near violating that right. But considering that those provisions are
applicable to all educational institutions and that the impugned parts of cls. 9, 11 and
12 are designed to give protection and security to the ill paid teachers who are
engaged in rendering service to the nation and protect the backward classes, we are
prepared, as at present advised, to treat these clauses 9, 11(2) and 12(4) as
permissible regulations which the State may impose on the minorities as a condition
for granting aid to their educational institutions. We, however, find it impossible to
support cls. 14 and 15 of the said Bill as mere regulations. The provisions of those
clauses may be totally destructive of the rights under Art. 30(1). It is true that the
right to aid is not implicit in Art. 30(1) but the provisions of those clauses, if
submitted to on account of their factual compulsion as condition of aid, may easily be
violative of Art. 30(1) of the Constitution. Learned counsel for the State of Kerala
recognizes that cls. 14 and 15 of the Bill may annihilate the minority communities'
right to manage educational institutions of their choice but submits that the validity
of those clauses is not the subject-
matter of question 2. But, as already explained, all newly established schools seeking aid or
recognition are, by clause 3(5), made subject to all the provisions of the Act. Therefore, in a
discussion as to the constitution validity of clause 3(5) a discussion of the validity of the other
clauses of the Bill becomes relevant, not as and by way of a separate item but in determining the
validity of the provisions of clause 3(5). In our opinion, sub-clause 3 of clause 8 and cls. 9, 10, 11, 12
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
22

and 13 being merely regulatory do not offend Art. 30(1), but the provisions of sub-clause (5) of
clause 3 by making the aided educational institutions subject to cls. 14 and 15 as conditions for the
grant of aid do offend against Art. 30(1) of the Constitution.” (Emphasis supplied) SK. MD. Rafique
vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
18. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai and Others v. State of Bombay and Another10, a Bench of six Judges
of this Court was called upon to decide following controversy:-
“The petitioners moved this Court for a writ in the nature of mandamus or other writ
directing the State of Bombay and the Director of Education not to compel the society
and the petitioners to reserve 80% or any seats in the training, College for “the
Government nominated teacher” nor to compel the society and the petitioners to
comply with the provisions of Rules 5(2), 11, 12 and 14 and not to withdraw
recognition of the College or withhold grant-in-aid under Rule 14 or otherwise.” 18.1
The petitioners, members of a religious denomination and constituting a religious
minority were running a Training College for teachers and 80% of the seats in all
non-Government Training Colleges were directed to be reserved for “the government
nominated teachers” so that such trained teachers could then be absorbed in Primary
and Basic Schools in the State run by District School or Municipal Boards.
18.2 It was submitted on behalf of the State that since the School run by the
Petitioners was receiving grant from the State, the State was within its rights to direct
reservation of seats as above. After referring to the decision of this Court in Re: The
Kerala Education Bill case9, it was observed by this Court as under:-
10 (1963) 3 SCR 837 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others “Article 30(1) provides that all minorities have the right
to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice, and Art. 30(2)
enjoins the State, in granting aid to educational institutions not to discriminate
against any educational institution on the ground that it is under the management of
a minority, whether based on religion or language. Clause (2) is only a phase of the
non-discrimination clause of the Constitution and does not derogate from the
provisions made in clause (1). The clause is moulded in terms negative : the State is
thereby enjoined not to discriminate in granting aid to educational institutions on the
ground that the management of the institution is in the hands of a minority, religious
or linguistic, but the form is not susceptible of the inference that the State is
competent otherwise to discriminate so as to impose restrictions upon the substance
of the right to establish and administer educational institutions by minorities,
religious or linguistic. Unlike Art. 19, the fundamental freedom under clause (1) of
Art. 30, is absolute in terms; it is not made subject to any reasonable restrictions of
the nature the fundamental freedoms enunciated in Art. 19 may be subjected to.
All minorities, linguistic or religious have by Art. 30(1) an absolute right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice; and any law or executive direction which seeks to infringe
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
23

the substance of that right under Art. 30(1) would to that extent be void. This, however, is not to say
that it is not open to the State to impose regulations upon the exercise of this right. The fundamental
freedom is to establish and to administer educational institutions : it is a right to establish and
administer what are in truth educational institutions, institutions which cater to the educational
needs of the citizens, or sections thereof. Regulation made in the true interests of efficiency of
instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order and the like may undoubtedly be
imposed. Such regulations are not restrictions on the substance of the right which is guaranteed :
they secure the proper functioning of the institution, in matters educational.
(Emphasis supplied) SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others 18.3 The effect of the opinion in Re: The Kerala Education Bill9 was considered as
under:-
It was therefore held that notwithstanding the absolute terms in which the
fundamental freedom under Art. 30(1) was guaranteed, it was open to the state by
legislation or by executive direction to impose reasonable regulation. The Court did
not, however, lay down any test of reasonableness of the regulation. The Court did
not decide that public or national interest was the sole measure or test of
reasonableness : it also did not decide that a regulation would be deemed
unreasonable only if it was totally destructive of the right of the minority to
administer educational institution. No general principle on which reasonableness or
otherwise of a regulation may be tested was sought to be laid down by the Court. The
Kerala Education Bill case 9, therefore, is not an authority for the proposition
submitted by the Additional Solicitor General that all regulative measures which are
not destructive or annihilative of the character of the institution established by the
minority, provided the regulations are in the national or public interest, are valid.”
The right established by Art. 30(1) is a fundamental right declared in terms absolute.
Unlike the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Art. 19, it is not subject to
reasonable restrictions. It is intended to be a real right for the protection of the
minorities in the matter of setting up of educational institutions of their own choice.
The right is intended to be effective and is not to be whittled down by so called
regulative measures conceived in the interest not of the minority educational
institution, but of the public or the nation as a whole. If every order which while
maintaining the formal character of a minority institution destroys the power of
administration is held justifiable because it is in the public or national interest,
though not in its interest as an educational institution, the right guaranteed by Art.
30(1) will be but a "teasing SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others illusion", a promise of unreality. Regulations
which may lawfully be imposed either by legislative or executive action as a condition
of receiving grant or of recognition must be directed to making the institution while
retaining its character as a minority institution effective as an educational institution.
Such regulation must satisfy a dual test - the test of reasonableness, and the test that
it is regulative of the educational character of the institution and is conducive to
making the institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority community
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
24

or other persons who resort to it.” (Emphasis supplied) 18.4 Finally, it was held, “We
are, therefore, of the view that the Rule 5(2) of the Rules for Primary Training
Colleges, and Rules 11 and 14 for recognition of Private Training institutions, insofar
as they relate to reservation of seats therein under orders of Government, and
directions given pursuant thereto regarding reservation of 80% of the seats and the
threat to withhold grant-in-aid and recognition of the college, infringe the
fundamental freedom guaranteed to the petitioners under Art.
30(1).”
19. In Rev. Father W. Proost and Others. vs. the State of Bihar and Others11, a Bench of five Judges
of this Court was called upon to consider the validity of certain provisions including Section 48-A of
the Bihar State Universities Act, 1960. In terms of said Section 48-A, no appointments, dismissals,
removals and termination of service or reduction in rank of teachers could be made by the governing
body of any college without the recommendations of the University Service Commission. By virtue
of 11AIR 1969 SC 465 = (1969) 2 SCR73 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Section 48A(6), the Commission was empowered to
recommend to the governing body of a college for appointment to every post of teacher, names of
two persons arranged in order of preference which were considered by the Commission to be the
best qualified for such posts.
While the challenge was pending in this Court, Section 48-B was introduced which stated inter alia
that notwithstanding anything contained in certain provisions including in sub-Section (6) of 48-A,
the governing body of an affiliated College established by a minority would be entitled to make
appointments, dismissals, removals, termination of service or reduction in rank of teachers or other
disciplinary measures subject only to the approval of the Commission and the Syndicate of the
University. Thus, instead of the Commission making the recommendations under the unamended
provisions, now the governing body established by a minority could make appointments which were
however subject to the approval by the Commission and the Syndicate of the University. While
allowing the petition this Court observed :-
“The learned Attorney General seeks to read into the protection granted by Art. 30(1)
a corollary taken from Art. 29(1). He concedes that the Jesuits community is a
minority community based on religion and that, therefore, it has a right to establish
and administer educational institutions of its choice. But he contends that as the
protection to minorities in Art. 29(1) is only a right to conserve a distinct language,
script or culture of its own, the college does not qualify for the protection of Art. 30(1)
because it is SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others not founded to conserve them. The question, therefore, is
whether the college can only claim protection of s. 48-B of the Act read with Art.
30(1) of the Constitution if it proves that the college is furthering the rights
mentioned in Art. 29(1).
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
25

In our opinion, the width of Article 30(1) cannot be cut down by introducing in it
considerations on which Article 29(1) is based. The latter article is a general
protection which is given to minorities to conserve their language, script or culture.
The former is a special right to minorities to establish educational institutions of their
choice. This choice is not limited to institution seeking to conserve language, script or
culture and the choice is not taken away if the minority community having
established an educational institution of its choice also admits members of other
communities. That is a circumstance irrelevant for the application of Article 30(1)
since no such limitation is expressed and none can be implied. The two articles create
two separate rights, although it is possible that they may meet in a given case.
… … … In our judgment the language of Art. 30(1) is wide and must receive full
meaning. We are dealing with protection of minorities and attempts to whittle down
the protection cannot be allowed. We need not enlarge the protection but we may not
reduce a protection naturally flowing from the words. Here the protection clearly
flows from the words and there is nothing on the basis of which aid can be sought
from Art. 29(1).”
20. In State of Kerala, etc vs. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, etc 4, a Bench of six Judges of this Court
considered challenge to certain SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others provisions of the Kerala University Act, 1969. The ambit of the concerned
provisions was set out by this Court as under:-
“16. Section 53, Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) confer on the Syndicate of the University
the power to veto even the action of the governing body or the managing council in
the selection of the principal. Similarly, Sub-section (4) takes away from the
educational agency or the corporate management the right to select the teachers. The
insistence on merit in Sub-section (4) or on seniority-cum-fitness in Sub- section (1)
does not save the situation. The power is exercised not by the educational agency or
the corporate management but by a distinct and autonomous body under the control
of the Syndicate of the University. Indeed Sub-section (9) gives a right of appeal to
the Syndicate to any person aggrieved by the action of governing body or the
managing council thus making the Syndicate the final and absolute authority in these
matters. Coupled with this is the power of Vice-Chancellor and the Syndicate in Sub-
sections (2) and (4) of Section 56.” 20.1 Thereafter, this Court extracted the relevant
provisions which took away the power to take disciplinary action from the governing
body and the managing council and conferred it upon the University. The decision of
the High Court which had found said provisions to be ultra vires was affirmed by this
Court as under:-
“19. The result of the above analysis of the provisions which have been successfully
challenged discloses that that High Court was right in its appreciation of the true
position in the light of the Constitution. We agree with the High Court that
Sub-Sections (2) and (4) of Sections 48 and 49 are ultra vires Article 30(1).
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
26

Indeed we think that Sub-Sections (6) of these two SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others sections are also ultra vires. They offend more than
the other two of which they are a part and parcel. We also agree that Sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and
(9) of Section 53, Sub-Sections (2) and (4) of Section 56 are ultra vires as they fail with Sections 48
and 49. We express no opinion regarding these sub-sections vis-a- vis Article 30(1). We also agree
that Section 58 (in so far as it removes disqualification which the founders may not like to agree to)
and Section 63 are ultra vires Articles 30(1) in respect of the minority institutions. The High Court
has held that the provisions (Except Section 63) are also offensive to Article 19(1)(f) in so far as the
petitioners are citizens of India both in respect of majority as well as minority institutions. This was
at first debated at least in so far as majority institutions were concerned. The majority institutions
invoked Article 14 and complained of discrimination. However, at a later stage of proceedings Mr.
Mohan Kumaramangalam stated that he had instructions to say that any provision held inapplicable
to minority institutions would not be enforced against the majority institutions also. Hence it
relieves us of the task of considering the matter under Article 19(1)(f) not only in respect of minority
institutions but in respect of majority institutions also. The provisions of Section 63 affect both
kinds of institutions alike and must be declared ultra vires in respect of both.”
21. In D.A.V. College, etc.. vs. State of Punjab and Others11, a Bench of five Judges of this Court
considered the challenge to certain provisions of the Guru Nanak University, Amritsar, Act, 1969
and notifications issued pursuant thereto. Under Section 2(1)(a) of the Act, a College applying for
admission to the privileges of the University was obliged to have a regularly constituted governing
body consisting of not more than 20 persons approved by the Senate which body must also include
two SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
representatives of the University. Section 17 required that the staff initially appointed must be
approved by the Vice Chancellor and any subsequent changes be reported to the University for
Vice-Chancellor’s approval.
These Sections were struck down by this Court as affecting the fundamental rights of the petitioners.
During the course of its discussion this Court stated as under:-
“36.We have already seen that in Rev. Father W. Proost and Ors. v. the State of Bihar
and Ors. 11, the provisions of Section 48(A) which required the selection of the
teachers of all affiliated Colleges including the Colleges established by the minorities,
to be made by the University Service Commission, was held to interfere with the
rights of the petitioners in that case. In that case, while the petition was pending in
the Court, Section 48 (B) was added to the Bihar State University Act whereby
notwithstanding the provisions of Section 48 (A) exemption was given to the
minority institutions to make appointments with the approval of the Commission and
the Syndicate, the petitioners claimed exemption under Section 48(B) and submitted
that as an affiliated College established by a minority based on religion or language
they are exempted from Section 48 (A) and that if this petition was accepted they will
withdraw the petition which had become superfluous. Even this prayer was not
acceded to by the State and consequently it was held that they were entitled to the
exemption claimed. This decision is not therefore an authority for the proposition
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
27

that even the requirement that the staff of a minority educational institution be
appointed, dismissed or removed only with the approval of the University or the State
does not infringe the right to administer the institution guaranteed under Article
30(1).
37. In our view there is no possible justification for the provisions contained in
Clauses 2(1)(a) and 17 of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Chapter V of the statutes which decidedly
interfere with the rights of management of the petitioners colleges. These provisions
cannot therefore be made as conditions of affiliation, the non-compliance of which
would involve disaffiliation and consequently they will have to be struck down as
offending Article 30(1).
38. Clause 18 however in our view does not suffer from the same vice as Clause 17
because that provision in so far as it is applicable to the minority institutions
empowers the University to prescribe by regulations governing the service and
conduct of teachers which is enacted in the larger interests of the Institutions to
ensure their efficiency and excellence.
It may for instance issue an ordinance in respect of age of superannuation or prescribe minimum
qualifications for teachers to be employed by such Institutions either generally or in particular
subjects. Uniformity in the conditions of service and conduct of teachers in all non-Government
Colleges would make for harmony and avoid frustration. Of course while the power to make
ordinances in respect of the matters referred to is unexceptional the nature of the infringement of
the right, if any, under Article 30(1) will depend on the actual purpose and import of the ordinance
when made and the manner in which it is likely to affect the administration of the educational
institution, about which it is not possible now to predicate.”
22. In Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society and Another vs. State of Gujarat and Another5 the
applicability of some of the provisions of the Gujarat University Act, 1949 to a college run by a
minority was in issue before a Bench of nine Judges of this Court. Three sets of provisions were
impeached as being violative of Article 30, viz. (i) Sections 40 and 41 in terms of which all colleges
within the University area would be governed SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others by the statutes of the University which may provide for
minimum educational qualifications for teachers and tutorial staff and the University may approve
the appointments of teachers and may coordinate and regulate the facilities provided and
expenditure incurred by such colleges for teaching and research; (ii) Sections 33A(1)(a) and
33A(1)(b) under which the management of a governing body of every college must include amongst
others, a representative of the University nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor and three representatives of the teachers of the college and at least one representative
each of the members of the non-teaching staff and the students of the college. Further, under
Section 33A(1)(b), for the purposes of recruitment of the principal and members of the teaching
staff, there would be a selection committee, which, in the case of recruitment of the principal, must
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
28

include a representative of the University nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and in case of
recruitment of a member of teaching staff, a representative of the University nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor and the Head of the Department concerned with the subject taught by such teacher;
(iii) Sections 51A and 52A in terms of which no member of teaching and non-teaching staff of any
affiliated college could be dismissed or removed from service or reduced in rank, except after an
inquiry; no termination of service of any such member would be valid unless such termination was
approved by the Vice-Chancellor; and any dispute SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others between the governing body of the college and any member
of the teaching or non-teaching staff must be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one
member nominated by the governing body of the college, one member nominated by the concerned
member and an Umpire to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor.
22.1. In the leading Judgment authored by Ray, C.J., for himself and Palekar, J., the extent of “right
to administer” under Article 30 of the Constitution and the effect of regulatory measures upon the
width of said right was summed up as under:-
“19. … … The right to administer is said to consist of four principal matters. First is
the right to choose its managing or governing body. It is said that the founders of the
minority institution have faith and confidence in their own committee or body
consisting of persons elected by them. Second is the right to choose its teachers. It is
said that minority institutions want teachers to have compatibility with the ideals,
aims and aspirations of the institution. Third is the right not to be compelled to
refuse admission to students. In other words, the minority institutions want to have
the right to admit students of their choice subject to reasonable regulations about
academic qualifications. Fourth is the right to use its properties and assets for the
benefit of its own institution.
20. The right conferred on the religious and linguistic minorities to administer
educational institutions of their choice is not an absolute right. This right is not free
from regulation. Just as regulatory measures are necessary for maintaining the
educational character and content of minority institutions similarly regulatory
measures are necessary for ensuring SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others orderly, efficient and sound
administration. Das, C.J., in the Kerala Education Bill case summed up in one
sentence the true meaning of the right to administer by saying that the right to
administer is not the right to mal-administer.
22.1.1 While considering the importance of teachers in an educational institution,
Ray, C.J., stated:-
“30. Educational institutions are temples of learning. The virtues of human
intelligence are mastered and harmonised by education. Where there is complete
harmony between the teacher and the taught, where the teacher imparts and the
student receives, where there is complete dedication of the teacher and the taught in
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
29

learning, where there is discipline between the teacher and the taught, where both
are worshippers of learning, no discord or challenge will arise. An educational
institution runs smoothly when the teacher and the taught are engaged in the
common ideal of pursuit of knowledge. It is, therefore, manifest that the appointment
of teachers is an important part in educational institutions. The qualifications and the
character of the teachers are really important. The minority institutions have the
right to administer institutions. This right implies the obligation and duty of the
minority institutions to render the very best to the students. In the right of
administration, checks and balances in the shape of regulatory measures are required
to ensure the appointment of good teachers and their conditions of service. The right
to administer is to be tempered with regulatory measures to facilitate smooth
administration. The best administration will reveal no trace or colour of minority. A
minority institution should shine in exemplary eclectism in the administration of the
institution. The best compliment that can be paid to a minority institution is that it
does not rest on or proclaim its minority character.
31. Regulations which will serve the interests of the students, regulations which will
serve the interests of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others the teachers are of paramount importance in good
administration. Regulations in the interest of efficiency of teachers, discipline and
fairness in administration are necessary for preserving harmony among affiliated
institutions.
32. Education should be a great cohesive force in developing integrity of the nation.
Education develops the ethos of the nation. Regulations are, therefore, necessary to
see that there are no divisive or disintegrating forces in administration.” (Emphasis
supplied) 22.1.2 The conclusion arrived at by the learned Chief Justice was:-
“45. For these reasons the provisions contained in Sections 40, 41, 33-A(1)(a),
33-A(1)(b), 51-A and 52- A cannot be applied to minority institutions. These
provisions violate the fundamental rights of the minority institutions.
46. The ultimate goal of a minority institution too imparting general secular
education is advancement of learning. This Court has consistently held that it is not
only permissible but also desirable to regulate everything in educational and
academic matters for achieving excellence and uniformity in standards of education.
47. In the field of administration it is not reasonable to claim that minority
institutions will have complete autonomy. Checks on the administration may be
necessary in order to ensure that the administration is efficient and sound and will
serve the academic needs of the institution. The right of a minority to administer its
educational institution involves, as part of it, a correlative duty of good
administration.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
30

48. The teachers and the taught form a world of their own where everybody is a
votary of learning. They SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others should not be made to know any distinction.
Their harmony rests on dedicated and disciplined pursuit of learning. The areas of
administration of minorities should be adjusted to concentrate on making learning
most excellent. That is possible only when all institutions follow the motto that the
institutions are places for worship of learning by the students and the teachers
together irrespective of any denomination and distinction.” (Emphasis supplied) 22.2
While agreeing with the view taken by the learned Chief Justice with respect to
aforestated provisions, Jaganmohan Reddy J., speaking for himself and Alagiriswami
J., also juxtaposed provisions in various statutes which had come up for
consideration before this Court from time to time.
As regards the opinion in Re: The Kerala Education Bill, 19579, it was observed:-
“The scope and ambit of the rights under Articles 29(1) and 30(1) were first
considered and analysed by this Court while giving its advice on the Presidential
Reference under Article 143 of the Constitution in Re the Kerala Education Bill, 1957.
The report which was made to the President in that Reference, it is true, is not
binding on this Court in any subsequent matter wherein in a concrete case the in
fringement of the rights under any analogous provision may be called in question,
though it is entitled to great weight. Under Article 143 this Court expresses its
opinion if it so chooses and in some cases it might even decline to express its opinion,
vide In Re Levy of Estate Duty12 cited with approval by Das, C.J. in In re The Kerala
Education Bill, 1957. In some cases the opinion may be based on certain stated
contingencies or on some assumed or hypothetical situations whereas in a concrete
case coming before this Court by way of an 12 1944 FCR 317 SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others appeal under
Article 133, or by special leave under Article 136 or by a petition under Article 32, the
law declared by it by virtue of Article 141 is binding on all courts within the territory
of India. Nonetheless the exposition of the various facets of the rights under Article
29(1) and Article 30(1) by Das, C.J. speaking for the majority, with the utmost clarity,
great perspicuity and wisdom has been the text from which this Court has drawn its
sustenance in its subsequent decisions. To the extent that this Court has applied
these principles to concrete cases there can be no question of there being any conflict
with what has been observed by Das, C.J. The decisions rendered on analogous
provisions as those that are under challenge in this case would prima facie govern
these cases, unless this larger Bench chooses to differ from them.” 22.3 Khanna, J. in
his concurring opinion, considered the extent to which regulations could be
prescribed, as under:-
“90. We may now deal with the scope and ambit of the right guaranteed by clause (1)
of Article 30. The clause confers a right on all minorities, whether they are based on
religion or language, to establish and administer educational instructions of their
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
31

choice. The right conferred by the clause is in absolute terms and is not subject to
restrictions, as in the case of rights conferred by Article 19 of the Constitution. The
right of the minorities to administer educational institutions does not, however,
prevent the making of reasonable regulations in respect of those institutions. The
regulations have necessarily to be made in the interest of the institution as a minority
educational institution. They have to be so designed as to make it an effective vehicle
for imparting education. The right to administer educational institutions can plainly
not include the right to maladminister. Regulations can be made to prevent the
housing of an educational institution in unhealthy surroundings as also to prevent
the setting up or continuation of an educational institution without qualified
teachers. The SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others State can prescribe regulations to ensure the excellence of the
institution. Prescription of standards for educational institutions does not militate
against the right of the minority to administer the institutions. Regulations made in
the true interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality,
public order and the like may undoubtedly be imposed. Such regulations are not
restrictions on the substance of the right which is guaranteed: they secure the proper
functioning of the institution, in matters educational [see observations of Shah, J. in
Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai10 p. 850]. Further as observed by Hidyatullah, C.J. in the
case of Very Rev. Mother Provincial4 the standards concern the body politic and are
dictated by considerations of the advancement of the country and its people.
Therefore, if universities establish syllabi for examinations they must be followed,
subject, however, to special subjects which the institutions may seek to teach, and to
a certain extent the State may also regulate the conditions of employment of teachers
and the health and hygiene of students. Such regulations do not bear directly upon
management as such although they may indirectly affect it. Yet the right of the State
to regulate education, educational standards and allied matters cannot be denied.
The minority institutions cannot be allowed to fall below the standards of excellence
expected of educational institutions, or under the guise of exclusive right of
management, to decline to follow the general pattern. While the management must
be left to them, they may be compelled to keep in step with others.
91. It is, in my opinion, permissible to make regulations for ensuring the regular
payment of salaries before a particular date of the month.
Regulations may well provide that the funds of the institution should be spent for the purposes of
education or for the betterment of the institution and not for extraneous purposes. Regulations may
also contain provisions to prevent the diversion of funds of institutions to the pockets of those
incharge of management or their embezzlement in any other manner. Provisions for audit of the
accounts of the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others institution would be permissible regulation. Likewise, regulations may provide that no
anti-national activity would be permitted in the educational institutions and that those employed as
members of the staff should not have been guilty of any activities against the national interest.
Minorities are as much part of the nation as the majority, and anything that impinges upon national
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
32

interest must necessarily in its ultimate operation affect the interests of all those who inhabit this
vast land irrespective of the fact whether they belong to the majority or minority sections of the
population. It is, therefore, as much in the interest of minorities as that of the majority to ensure
that the protection afforded to minority institutions is not used as a cloak for doing something which
is subversive of national interests. Regulations to prevent anti-national activities in educational
institutions can, therefore, be considered to be reasonable.
92. A regulation which is designed to prevent maladministration of an educational institution
cannot be said to offend clause (1) of Article 30. At the sametime it has to be ensured that under the
power of making regulations nothing is done as would detract from the character of the institution
as a minority educational institution or which would impinge upon the rights of the minorities to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. The right conferred by Article 30(1)
is intended to be real and effective and not a mere pious and abstract sentiment; it is a promise of
reality and not a teasing illusion. Such a right cannot be allowed to be whittled down by any measure
masquerading as a regulation. As observed by this Court in the case of Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai,
regulations which may lawfully be imposed either by legislative or executive action as a condition of
receiving grant or of recognition must be directed to making the institution while retaining its
character as minority institution effective as an educational institution. Such regulation must satisfy
a dual test — the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of the educational character
of the institution and is conducive to making the institution SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others an effective vehicle of education for the
minority community or other persons who resort to it.
… … …
94. If a request is made for the affiliation or recognition of an educational institution, it is implicit in
the request that the educational institution would abide by the regulations which are made by the
authority granting affiliation or recognition. The said authority can always prescribe regulations and
insist that they should be complied with before it would grant affiliation or recognition to an
educational institution. To deny the power of making regulations to the authority concerned would
result in robbing the concept of affiliation or recognition of its real essence. No institution can claim
affiliation or recognition until it conforms to a certain standard. The fact that the institution is of the
prescribed standard indeed inheres in the very concept of affiliation or recognition. It is, therefore,
permissible for the authority concerned to prescribe regulations which must be complied with
before an institution can seek and retain affiliation and recognition. Question then arises whether
there is any limitation on the prescription of regulations for minority educational institutions. So far
as this aspect is concerned, the authority prescribing the regulations must bear in mind that the
Constitution has guaranteed a fundamental right to the minorities for establishing and
administering their educational institutions. Regulations made by the authority concerned should
not impinge upon that right. Balance has, therefore, to be kept between the two objectives, that of
ensuring the standard of excellence of the institution and that of preserving the right of the
minorities to establish and administer their educational institutions. Regulations which embrace
and reconcile the two objectives can be considered to be reasonable.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
33

… … …
103. Another conclusion which follows from what has been discussed above is that a law which
interferes SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
with a minority’s choice of qualified teachers or its disciplinary control over teachers and other
members of the staff of the institution is void as being violative of Article 30(1). It is, of course,
permissible for the State and its educational authorities to prescribe the qualifications of teachers,
but once the teachers possessing the requisite qualifications are selected by the minorities for their
educational institutions, the State would have no right to veto the selection of those teachers. The
selection and appointment of teachers for an educational institution is one of the essential
ingredients of the right to manage an educational institution and the minorities can plainly be not
denied such right of selection and appointment without infringing Article 30(1). In the case of Rev.
Father W. Proost11 this Court while dealing with Section 48-A of the Bihar Universities Act observed
that the said provision completely took away the autonomy of the governing body of the college and
virtually vested the control of the college in the University Service Commission. The petitioners in
that case were, therefore, held entitled to the protection of Article 30(1) of the Constitution. The
provisions of that section have been referred to earlier. According to the section, subject to the
approval of University appointment, dismissals, removals, termination of service or reduction in
rank of teachers of an affiliated college not belonging to the State Government would have to be
made by the governing body of the college on the recommendation of the University Service
Commission. The section further provided that the said Commission would be consulted by the
governing body of a college in all disciplinary matters affecting teachers of the college and no action
would be taken against or any punishment imposed upon a teacher of a college otherwise than in
conformity with the findings of the Commission.
104. In the case of D.A.V. College which was affiliated to the Guru Nanak University, Statute 17
framed under the Guru Nanak University (Amritsar) Act inter alia provided that the staff initially
appointed shall be approved by the Vice-Chancellor and that all SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others subsequent changes shall be reported to
the University for Vice-Chancellor’s approval. This Court held that Statute 17 interfered with the
right of management of the petitioner colleges and, as such, offended Article 30(1).
105. Although disciplinary control over the teachers of a minority educational institution would be
with the governing council, regulations, in my opinion, can be made for ensuring proper conditions
of service of the teachers and for securing a fair procedure in the matter of disciplinary action
against the teachers. Such provisions which are calculated to safeguard the interest of teachers
would result in security of tenure and thus inevitably attract competent persons for the posts of
teachers. Such a provision would also eliminate a potential cause of frustration amongst the
teachers. Regulations made for this purpose should be considered to be in the interest of minority
educational institutions and as such they would not violate Article 30(1).” (Emphasis supplied) 22.4
In his concurring view, Mathew, J. speaking for himself and Chandrachud, J. (as the learned Chief
Justice, then was) also dealt with the extent to which the regulations could be prescribed, as under:-
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
34

“174. We find it impossible to subscribe to the proposition that State necessity is the
criterion for deciding whether a regulation imposed on an educational institution
takes away or abridges the right under Article 30(1). If a legislature can impose any
regulation which it thinks necessary to protect what in its view is in the interest of the
State or society, the right under Article 30(1) will cease to be a fundamental right. It
sounds paradoxical that a right which the Constitution makers wanted to be absolute
can be subjected to regulations which need only satisfy the nebulous and elastic test
of State necessity. The very purpose of incorporating this right in Part III SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others of
the Constitution in absolute terms in marked contrast with the other fundamental
rights was to withdraw it from the reach of the majority. To subject the right today to
regulations dictated by the protean concept of State necessity as conceived by the
majority would be to subvert the very purpose for which the right was given.
175. What then are the additional regulations which can legitimately be imposed
upon an educational institution established and administered by a religious or
linguistic minority which imparts general secular education and seeks recognition or
affiliation?
176. Recognition or affiliation is granted on the basis of the excellence of an
educational institution, namely, that it has reached the educational standard set up
by the university. Recognition or affiliation is sought for the purpose of enabling the
students in an educational institution to sit for an examination to be conducted by
the university and to obtain a degree conferred by the university. For that purpose,
the students should have to be coached in such a manner so as to attain the standard
of education prescribed by the university. Recognition or affiliation creates an
interest in the university to ensure that the educational institution is maintained for
the purpose intended and any regulation which will subserve or advance that purpose
will be reasonable and no educational institution established and administered by a
religious or linguistic minority can claim recognition or affiliation without submitting
to those regulations.
That is the price of recognition or affiliation: but this does not mean that it should submit to a
regulation stipulating for surrender of a right or freedom guaranteed by the Constitution, which is
unrelated to the purpose of recognition or affiliation. In other words, recognition or affiliation is a
facility which the university grants to an educational institution, for the purpose of enabling the
students there to sit for an examination to be conducted by the university in the prescribed subjects
and to obtain the degree conferred by the university, and therefore, it stands to reason to hold that
no regulation which is unrelated to the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others purpose can be imposed. If, besides recognition or
affiliation, an educational institution conducted by a religious minority is granted aid, further
regulations for ensuring that the aid is utilized for the purpose for which it is granted will be
permissible. The heart of the matter is that no educational institution established by a religious or
linguistic minority can claim total immunity from regulations by the legislature or the university if it
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
35

wants affiliation or recognition; but the character of the permissible regulations must depend upon
their purpose. As we said, such regulations will be permissible if they are relevant to the purpose of
securing or promoting the object of recognition or affiliation. There will be border line cases where it
is difficult to decide whether a regulation really subserves the purpose of recognition or affiliation.
But that does not affect the question of principle. In every case, when the reasonableness of a
regulation comes up for consideration before the Court, the question to be asked and answered is
whether the regulation is calculated to subserve or will in effect subserve the purpose of recognition
or affiliation, namely, the excellence of the institution as a vehicle for general secular education to
the minority community and to other persons who resort to it. The question whether a regulation is
in the general interest of the public has no relevance, if it does not advance the excellence of the
institution as a vehicle for general secular education as, exhypothesi, the only permissible
regulations are those which secure the effectiveness of the purpose of the facility, namely, the
excellence of the educational institutions in respect of their educational standards. This is the reason
why this Court has time and again said that the question whether a particular regulation is
calculated to advance the general public interest is of no consequence if it is not conducive to the
interests of the minority community and those persons who resort to it.
… … …
182. It is upon the principal and teachers of a college that the tone and temper of an educational
institution SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others depend. On them would depend its reputation, the maintenance of discipline and its
efficiency in teaching. The right to choose the principal and to have the teaching conducted by
teachers appointed by the management after an overall assessment of their outlook and philosophy
is perhaps the most important facet of the right to administer an educational institution. We can
perceive no reason why a representative of the University nominated by the Vice-Chancellor should
be on the Selection Committee for recruiting the Principal or for the insistence of head of the
department besides the representative of the University being on the Selection Committee for
recruiting the members of the teaching staff. So long as the persons chosen have the qualifications
prescribed by the University, the choice must be left to the management. That is part of the
fundamental right of the minorities to administer the educational institution established by them.”
(Emphasis supplied) 22.5 In his concurring opinion, Beg, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was)
however struck a slightly different chord. At the outset he stated:-
197. … … I would, however, like to point out that, as rights and duties are correlative,
it follows, from the extent of this wider right of a minority under Article 30(1) to
impart even general or non-denominational secular education to those who may not
follow its culture or subscribe to its beliefs, that, when a minority Institution decides
to enter this wider educational sphere of national education, it, by reason of this free
choice itself, could be deemed to opt to adhere to the needs of the general pattern of
such education in the country, at least whenever that choice is made in accordance
with statutory provisions. Its choice to impart an education intended to give a secular
orientation or character to its education necessarily entails its assent to the
imperative needs SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
36

Madrasah and Others of the choice made by the State about the kind of “secular”
education which promotes national integration or the elevating objectives set out in
the preamble to our Constitution, and the best way of giving it. If it is part of a
minority’s rights to make such a choice it should also be part of its obligations, which
necessarily follow from the choice, to adhere to the general pattern. The logical basis
of such a choice is that the particular minority Institution, which chooses to impart
such general secular education, prefers that higher range of freedom where,
according to the poet Rabindranath Tagore, “the narrow domestic walls” which
constitute barriers between various sections of the nation will crumble and fall.
… …” 22.5.1 In his view, third set of provisions namely Sections 51A and 52A did not constitute any
unreasonable encroachment on the essence of the rights under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. It
was observed:-
“212. Section 51-A of the Act appears to me to lay down general conditions for the
dismissal, removal, reduction in rank and termination of services of members of the
staff of all colleges to which it applies. Again, we have not to consider here either the
wisdom or unwisdom of such a provision or the validity of any part of Section 51-A of
the Act on the ground that it violates any fundamental right other than the ones
conferred by Article 30(1) of the Constitution. If, as I have indicated above, a greater
degree of interference with the right to administer or manage an institution can be
held to be permissible as a logical consequence of the exercise of an option of a
minority for an institution governed by a statute, with all its benefits as well as
disadvantages, it seems to me that provisions of Section 51-A do not constitute an
unreasonable encroachment on the essence of rights of a minority institution
protected by Article 30(1) of the Constitution which consists of freedom of choice. For
similar reasons, I do not think that Section SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others 52-A of the Act constitutes
an infringement of the special minority rights under Article 30(1) of the Constitution
when the institution opts for a statutory right which necessarily involves statutory
restrictions. Of course, if these provisions could be held to be invalid on any grounds
as against all affiliated colleges, whether they are administered by minorities or
majorities in a State, they could be held to be invalid against the petitioning College
too on those grounds. But, as I have already said, we are not concerned here with
such grounds or questions at all.” 22.5.2 Beg, J., then considered all previous
decisions of this Court and made following observations:-
“221. Evidently, what was meant was that the right to exclusive management of the
institution is separable from the right to determine the character of education and its
standards. This may explain why “standards” of education were spoken as “not part
of management” at all. It meant that the right to manage, having been conferred in
absolute terms, could not be interfered with at all although the object of that
management could be determined by a general pattern to be laid down by the State
which could prescribe the syllabi and standards of education. Speaking for myself, I
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
37

find it very difficult to separate the objects and standards of teaching from a right to
determine who should teach and what their qualifications should be. Moreover, if the
“standards of education” are not part of management, it is difficult to see how they
are exceptions to the principle of freedom of management from control. Again, if
what is aimed at directly is to be distinguished from an indirect effect of it, the
security of tenure of teachers and provisions intended to ensure fair and equitable
treatment for them by the management of an institution would also not be directly
aimed at interference with its management. They could more properly be viewed as
designed to improve and ensure the excellence of teachers available at the institution,
and, therefore, to raise the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others general standard of education. I think that it
is enough for us to distinguish this case on the ground that the provisions to be
interpreted by us are different, although, speaking for myself, I feel bound to say,
with great respect, that I am unable to accept every proposition found stated there as
correct. In that case, the provisions of the Kerala University Act 9 of 1969, considered
there were inescapable for the minority institutions which claimed the right to be free
from their operation. As I have already observed, in the case before us, Section 38-B
of the Act provides the petitioning College before us with a practically certain mode of
escape from the compulsiveness of provisions other than Sections 5, 40 and 41 of the
Act if claims made on its behalf are correct.
… … …
229. It may be that Article 30(1) of the Constitution is a natural result of the feeling of
insecurity entertained by the minorities which had to be dispelled by a guarantee
which could not be reduced to a “teasing illusion”. But, is it anything more than an
illusion to view the choice of a minority as to what it does with its educational
institution as a matter of unconcern and indifference to the whole organised society
which the State represents?” … … …
232. Even if Article 30(1) of the Constitution is held to confer absolute and unfettered
rights of management upon minority institutions, subject only to absolutely minimal
and negative controls in the interests of health and law and order, it could not be
meant to exclude a greater degree of regulation and control when a minority
institution enters the wider sphere of general secular and non-denominational
education, largely employs teachers who are not members of the particular minority
concerned, and when it derives large parts of its income from the fees paid by those
who are not members of the particular minority in question. Such greater degree of
control could be justified by the need to secure the interests of those who are affected
by the management of the minority institution and the education it imparts but SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
who are not members of the minority in management.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
38

In other words, the degree of reasonably permissible control must vary from situation to situation.
For the reasons already given above, I think that, apart from Sections 5, 40 and 41 of the Act, which
directly and unreasonably impinge upon the rights of the petitioning minority managed college,
protected by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, I do not think that the other provisions have that
effect. On the situation under consideration before us, the minority institution affected by the
enactment has, upon the claims put forward on its behalf, a means of escape from the impugned
provisions other than Sections 5, 40 and 41 of the Act by resorting to Section 38-B of the Act.” 22.6
In his dissenting view, Dwivedi, J. expressed with regard to the extent of regulatory power as
under:-
“266. The extent of regulatory power of the State would vary according to various
types of educational institutions established by religious and linguistic minorities.
Educational institutions may be classified in several ways: (1) According to the nature
of instruction which is being imparted by the minorities. It may be religious, cultural
and linguistic instruction or secular general education or mixed; (2) According to
grant of aid and recognition by the State. Some institutions may receive aid; the
others may not. Similarly, some institutions may receive recognition; the others may
not. There may be some others which may receive both aid and recognition; some
others may receive neither aid nor recognition. (3) According to the standard of
secular general education which is being imparted in the institutions — primary,
secondary and higher. (4) According to the nature of education such as military
academy, marine engineering in which the State is vitally interested for various
reasons.
267. The extent of regulatory power may vary from class to class as well as within a
class. For instance, SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others institutions receiving aid and recognition may be subject
to greater regulation than those which receive neither. Similarly, institutions
imparting secular general education may be subject to greater regulation than those
which are imparting religious, cultural and linguistic instruction solely.
268. An educational institution would consist of: (1) the managing body of the
institution, (2) teaching staff, (3) non-teaching staff, (4) students; and (5) property of
various kinds. Here again, the extent of the regulatory power may vary from one
constituent to another. For instance, the teaching staff and property may be subject
to greater regulation than the composition of the managing body. Plainly, no
minority educational institution can be singled out for treatment different from one
meted out to the majority educational institution. A regulation meeting out such a
discriminatory treatment will be obnoxious to Article 30(1).” 22.7 The operative part
of the Order passed by this Court was:-
“304. By majority Sections 33-A, 40, 41, 51-A(1)(b), 51-A(2)(b) and 52-A of the
Gujarat University Act, 1949 as amended do not apply to institutions established and
administered by linguistic and religious minorities. … … …”
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
39

23. In The Gandhi Faiz-e-am College, Shahjahanpur v. University of Agra and Another13, a Bench of
three Judges of this Court considered whether Statute 14A framed by University of Agra infringed
fundamental rights of the minority community under Article 30 of the Constitution. The facts as set
out in para 3 were as under:-
13 (1975) 2 SCC 283 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others “3. The appellant is a registered society formed by the
members of the Muslim community at Shahjahanpur.
Indubitably, the community ranks as a minority in the country and the educational institution run
by it has been found to be what may loosely be called a “minority institution”, within the
constitutional compass of Article 30. The earlier history of the institution need not detain us and a
rapid glance at its evolution is enough. The A.V. Middle School was the offspring of the effort of the
Muslim minority resident in Shahjahanpur district. It, later became a high school and afterwards
attained the status of an Intermediate college. Eventually it blossomed into a degree college
affiliated to the University of Agra. In 1948, on the assassination of the Father of the Nation, this
college was commemoratively renamed as Gandhi Faiz-e-am College. In August 1964, an application
was made on behalf of the college management to the University for permission to start teaching in
courses of study including Sociology, Sanskrit, Arabic, Military Studies, Drawing and Painting. The
University entertained the thought that a new organisational discipline must be brought into the
institution and insisted, as a condition of recognition of these additional subjects as course of study,
on certain mutations in the administrative body of the college. The bone of contention before us, as
was before the High Court, is that this prescription by the University, in tune with Statute 14A
framed by it, is an invasion of the fundamental right guaranteed to the minority community under
Article 30 of the Constitution of India. The High Court has negatived the plea of the management
and the appeal issues from that decision.” 23.1 Statute 14A as quoted in para 6 was to the following
effect:-
“14A. Each college, already affiliated or when affiliated, which is not maintained
exclusively by Government must be under the Management of a regular constituted
Governing body (which term includes Managing Committee) on which the staff of the
college shall be represented by the Principal of the college and at least one
representative of the teachers SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others of the college to be appointed by rotation in
order of seniority determined by length of service in the college, who shall hold office
for one academic year.” 23.2 Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for himself and Gupta, J.
found the provision calculated to promote excellence of the Institution and therefore
rejected the challenge. The relevant observations were:-
“16. The discussion throws us back to a closer study of Statute 14A to see if it cuts into
the flesh of the management’s right or merely tones up its health and habits. The two
requirements the University asks for are that the managing body (whatever its name)
must take in (a) the Principal of the College; (b) its seniormost teacher. Is this
desideratum dismissible as biting into the autonomy of management or tenable as
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
40

ensuring the excellence of the institution without injuring the essence of the right?
On a careful reflection and conscious of the constitutional dilemma, we are inclined
to the view that this case falls on the valid side of the delicate line. Regulation which
restricts is bad; but regulation which facilitates is good. Where does this fine
distinction lie? No rigid formula is possible but a flexible test is feasible. Where the
object and effect is to improve the tone and temper of the administration without
forcing on it a stranger, however superb his virtues be, where the directive is not to
restructure the governing body but to better its performance by a marginal catalytic
induction, where no external authority’s fiat or approval or outside nominee is made
compulsory to validate the Management Board but inclusion of an internal key
functionary appointed by the autonomous management alone is asked for, the
provision is salutary and saved, being not a diktat eroding the freedom of the
freedom.
… … …
24. In all these cases administrative autonomy is imperilled transgressing purely
regulatory limits. In SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others our case autonomy is virtually left intact and
refurbishing, not restructuring, is prescribed. The core of the right is not gouged out
at all and the regulation is at once reasonable and calculated to promote excellence of
the institution — a text book instance of constitutional conditions.” 23.3. Mathew, J.
authored a dissenting opinion. Relying upon various views expressed in Ahmedabad
St. Xavier’s College5 including one rendered by the learned Judge himself, it was
observed :-
“41. The determination of the composition of the body to administer the educational
institution established by a religious minority must be left to the minority as that is
the core of the right to administer. Regulations to prevent maladministration by that
body are permissible. As the right to determine the composition of the body which
will administer the educational institution is the very essence of the right to
administer guaranteed to the religious or linguistic minority under Article 30(1), any
interference in that area by an outside authority cannot be anything but an
abridgment of that right. The religious or linguistic minority must be given the
freedom to constitute the agency through which it proposes to administer the
educational institution established by it as that is what Article 30(1) guarantees. The
right to shape its creation is one thing: the right to regulate the manner in which it
would function after it has come into being is another. Regulations are permissible to
prevent maladministration but they can only relate to the manner of administration
after the body which is to administer has come into being.
42. The provisions of Statute 14A are in pari materia with those of Section 33-A(1)(a)
of the Act which fell for consideration in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College case (supra)
except that only the principal and the seniormost member of the staff alone are
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
41

required to be included in the managing committee of the college SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others in question
here. But, in principle, that makes no difference. The principle, as I said, is that the
minority community has the exclusive right to vest the administration of the college
in a body of its own choice, and any compulsion from an outside authority to include
any other person in that body is an abridgment of its fundamental right to administer
the educational institution.” 23.4 In terms of the decision of the majority, the
challenge was negated and Statute 14A was not found to be vulnerable or void.
24. In Lily Kurian v. Sr. Lewina and Others14, a Bench of five Judges of this Court
was called upon to consider whether the appellate power conferred upon the Vice
Chancellor of the University 15 would encroach upon the rights of a minority
institution to enforce and ensure discipline over its teachers.
The matter was considered by this Court as under:-
“51. An analysis of the judgments in St. Xaviers College case clearly shows that seven
out of nine judges held that the provisions contained in clause (b) of sub-sections (1)
and (2) of Section 51-A of the Act were not applicable to an educational institution
established and managed by religious or linguistic minority as they interfere with the
disciplinary control of the management over the staff of its educational institutions.
The reasons given by the majority were that the power of the management to
terminate the services of any member of the teaching or other academic and
non-academic staff was based on the 14 (1979) 2 SCC 124 15 By Ordinance 33 against
any order passed by the Management taking disciplinary action against a teacher.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
relationship between an employer and his employees and no encroachment could be made on this
right to dispense with their services under the contract of employment, which was an integral part of
the right to administer, and that these provisions conferred on the Vice-Chancellor or any other
officer of the University authorised by him, uncanalised, unguided and unlimited power to veto the
actions of the management. According to the majority view, the conferral of such blanket power on
the Vice- Chancellor and his nominee was an infringement of the right of administration guaranteed
under Article 30(1) to the minority institutions, religious and linguistic. The majority was
accordingly of the view that the provisions contained in clause (b) of sub- sections (1) and (2) of
Section 51-A of the Act had the effect of destroying the minority institution’s disciplinary control
over the teaching and non- teaching staff of the college as no punishment could be inflicted by the
management on a member of the staff unless it gets approval from an outside authority like the
Vice-Chancellor or an officer of the University authorised by him. On the contrary, the two
dissenting Judges were of the view that these provisions were permissive regulatory measures.
52. The power of appeal conferred on the Vice- Chancellor under Ordinance 33(4) is not only a grave
encroachment on the institution’s right to enforce and ensure discipline in its administrative affairs
but it is uncanalised and unguided in the sense that no restrictions are placed on the exercise of the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
42

power. The extent of the appellate power of the Vice- Chancellor is not defined, and, indeed, his
powers are unlimited. The grounds on which the Vice-Chancellor can interfere in such appeals are
also not defined. He may not only set aside an order of dismissal of a teacher and order his
reinstatement, but may also interfere with any of the punishments enumerated in Items (ii) to (v) of
Ordinance 33(2), that is to say, he can even interfere against the infliction of minor punishments. In
the absence of any guide-lines, it cannot be held that the power of the Vice-Chancellor SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others under Ordinance
33(4) was merely a check on maladministration.
53. As laid down by the majority in St. Xaviers College case, such a blanket power directly interferes
with the disciplinary control of the managing body of a minority educational institution over its
teachers. The majority decision in St. Xaviers College case squarely applies to the facts of the present
case and accordingly it must be held that the impugned Ordinance 33(4) of the University of Kerala
is violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution. If the conferral of such power on an outside authority
like the Vice-Chancellor, which while maintaining the formal character of a minority institution
destroys the power of administration, that is, its disciplinary control, is held justifiable because it is
in the public and national interest, though not in its interest as an educational institution, the right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) will be, to use the well-known expression, a “teasing illusion”, a
“promise of unreality”.
25. In All Saints High School, Hyderabad and Others v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and
Others16, the question that arose for consideration before a Bench of three Judges of this Court, was
whether certain provisions of Andhra Pradesh Recognised Private Educational Institutions
(Control) Act, 1975 offended fundamental rights conferred on minorities by Article 30(1). In terms
of Sections 3(1) and 3(2), no teacher employed in any private educational institution could be
dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except with the prior approval of the competent authority;
and in terms of Section 3(2) such approval could be granted if the 16 (1980) 2 SCC 478 SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others competent
authority was satisfied that there were adequate and reasonable grounds. Section 3(3)(a) provided
that no teacher could be placed under suspension except when an enquiry into the gross misconduct
of such teacher was contemplated and as per terms of Section 3(3)(b), no suspension could remain
in force for more than two months if the enquiry was not completed within that period.
25.1. Chandrachud, C.J. agreed with Fazal Ali, J. that Sections 3(1) and 3(2) would offend Article
30(1) and as such could not be applied to minority institutions. The learned Chief Justice however
did not agree with Faizal Ali, J. insofar as Sections 3(3)(a) and 3(3)(b) but agreed with Kailasam, J.
to hold that those provisions did not offend Article 30(1).
Faizal Ali, J. had found all the provisions to be invalid while Kailasam, J.
had found the concerned provisions to be valid and not violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
26. In Frank Anthony Public School Employees’ Assoication v.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
43

Union of India and others17 validity of Section 12 of Delhi School Education Act on the strength of
which certain provisions of said Act would not apply to an unaided minority school, was under
challenge. It was submitted by the petitioners that the teachers and other employees 17 (1986) 4 SCC
707 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
working in an unaided school were entitled to same pay-scale, allowances and benefits as were
enjoyed by persons employed in schools governed by the provisions of said Act and to the extent
Section 12 excluded applicability of some of the provisions of the Act, said Section was hit by Article
14 of the Constitution. The argument raised on behalf of the institution was :-
“14. … …the right to appoint members of staff being an undoubted right of the
management and the right to stipulate their salaries and allowances etc. being part of
their right to appoint, such right could not be taken away from the management of a
minority institution.” 26.1 While allowing the petition this Court observed:
“16. The excellence of the instruction provided by an institution would depend
directly on the excellence of the teaching staff, and in turn, that would depend on the
quality and the contentment of the teachers. Conditions of service pertaining to
minimum qualifications of teachers, their salaries, allowances and other conditions of
service which ensure security, contentment and decent living standards to teachers
and which will consequently enable them to render better service to the institution
and the pupils cannot surely be said to be violative of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution. The management of a minority
Educational Institution cannot be permitted under the guise of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the Constitution, to oppress or exploit its employees
any more than any other private employee. Oppression or exploitation of the teaching
staff of an educational institution is bound to lead, inevitably, to discontent and
deterioration of the standard of instruction SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others imparted in the institution
affecting adversely the object of making the institution an effective vehicle of
education for the minority community or other persons who resort to it. The
management of minority institution cannot complain of invasion of the fundamental
right to administer the institution when it denies the members of its staff the
opportunity to achieve the very object of Article 30(1) which is to make the institution
an effective vehicle of education.
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
                                      …       …       …
23. We must refer to the submissions of Mr Frank Anthony regarding the excellence
of the institution and the fear that the institution may have to close down if they have
to pay higher scales of salary and allowances to the members of the staff. As we said
earlier the excellence of the institution is largely dependent on the excellence of the
teachers and it is no answer to the demand of the teachers for higher salaries to say
that in view of the high reputation enjoyed by the institution for its excellence, it is
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
44

unnecessary to seek to apply provisions like Section 10 of the Delhi School Education
Act to the Frank Anthony Public School. On the other hand, we should think that the
very contribution made by the teachers to earn for the institution the high reputation
that it enjoys should spur the management to adopt at least the same scales of pay as
the other institutions to which Section 10 applies. Regarding the fear expressed by
Shri Frank Anthony that the institution may have to close down we can only hope
that the management will do nothing to the nose to spite the face, merely to “put the
teachers in their proper place”. The fear expressed by the management here has the
same ring as the fear expressed invariably by the management of every industry that
disastrous results would follow which may even lead to the closing down of the
industry if wage scales are revised.” SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
27. In Bihar State Madarasa Education Board, Patna v. Madarasa Hanfia Arabic
College, Jamalia and others18 the declaration by the High Court that Section 7(2)(n)
was unconstitutional as it conferred power on the Board to dissolve the Managing
Committee of a Madarasa, was under challenge. The decision was upheld by this
Court observing as under:
“6. The question which arises for consideration is whether Section 7(2)(n) which
confers power on the Board to dissolve the Managing Committee of an aided and
recognised Madarasa institution violates the minorities constitutional right to
administer its educational institution according to their choice. This Court has all
along held that though the minorities have right to establish and administer
educational institution of their own choice but they have no right to maladminister
and the State has power to regulate management and administration of such
institutions in the interest of educational need and discipline of the institution. Such
regulation may have indirect effect on the absolute right of minorities but that would
not violate Article 30(1) of the Constitution as it is the duty of the State to ensure
efficiency in educational institutions. The State has, however, no power to completely
take over the management of a minority institution. Under the guise of regulating the
educational standards to secure efficiency in institution, the State is not entitled to
frame rules or regulations compelling the management to surrender its right of
administration. In State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial, Section 63(1) of the
Kerala University Act, 1969 which conferred power on the government to take over
the management of a minority institution on its default in carrying out the directions
of the State Government was declared ultra vires on the ground that the provisions
interfered with the constitutional right of a minority to administer its institution.
Minority institutions cannot be allowed to
18 (1990) 1 SCC 428 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others fall below the standard of excellence on the pretext of their exclusive right of
management but at the same time their constitutional right to administer their institutions cannot
be completely taken away by superseding or dissolving Managing Committee or by appointing ad
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
45

hoc committees in place thereof. In the instant case Section 7(2)(n) is clearly violative of
constitutional right of minorities under Article 30(1) of the Constitution insofar as it provides for
dissolution of Managing Committee of a Madarasa. We agree with the view taken by the High
Court.”
28. In St. Stephen’s College vs. University of Delhi 19 a Bench of five Judges of this Court had an
occasion to consider the admission process adopted by two aided minority institutions viz. St.
Stephen’s College at Delhi and Allahabad Agricultural Institute at Naini. The factual context as
summed-up in the majority judgment authored by Shetty, J., was as under:-
“68. It is not in dispute that St. Stephen’s College and Allahabad Agricultural
Institute are receiving grant- in-aid from the government. St. Stephen’s College gives
preference to Christian students. The Allahabad Agricultural Institute reserves 50 per
cent of the seats for Christian students. The Christian students admitted by
preference or against the quota reserved are having less merit in the qualifying
examination than the other candidates. The other candidsates with more merit are
denied admission on the ground that they are not Christians.
69. It was argued for the University and the Students Union that since both the
institutions are receiving State aid, the institutional preference for admission based
on religion is violative of Article 29(2) of the Constitution. The institutions shall not
prefer or deny 19 (1992) 1 SCC 558 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others admission to candidates on ground of
religion. For institutions, on the other hand, it was claimed that any preference given
to the religious minority candidates in their own institutions cannot be a
discrimination falling under Article 29(2). The institutions are established for the
benefit of their community and if they are prevented from admitting their community
candidates, the purpose of establishing the institutions would be defeated. The
minorities are entitled to admit their candidates by preference or by reservation.
They are also entitled to admit them to the exclusion of all others and that right flows
from the right to establish and administer educational institutions guaranteed under
Article 30(1).” 28.1 The majority judgment dealt with the submissions raised by the
institution as under:-
“80. Equally, it would be difficult to accept the second submission that the minorities
are entitled to establish and administer educational institutions for their exclusive
benefit. The choice of institution provided in Article 30(1) does not mean that the
minorities could establish educational institution for the benefit of their own
community people. Indeed, they cannot. It was pointed out in Re, Kerala Education
Bill that the minorities cannot establish educational institution only for the benefit of
their community. If such was the aim, Article 30(1) would have been differently
worded and it would have contained the words “for their own community”. In the
absence of such words it is legally impermissible to construe the article as conferring
the right on the minorities to establish educational institution for their own benefit.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
46

81. Even in practice, such claims are likely to be met with considerable hostility. It
may not be conducive to have a relatively homogeneous society. It may lead to
religious bigotry which is the bane of mankind. In the nation building with secular
character sectarian SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others schools or colleges, segregated faculties or universities for
imparting general secular education are undesirable and they may undermine secular
democracy. They would be inconsistent with the central concept of secularism and
equality embedded in the Constitution. Every educational institution irrespective of
community to which it belongs is a ‘melting pot’ in our national life. The students and
teachers are the critical ingredients. It is there they develop respect for, and tolerance
of, the cultures and beliefs of others. It is essential therefore, that there should be
proper mix of students of different communities in all educational institutions.” 28.2
The relaxation given by St. Stephen’s College to Christian students was dealt with as
under:-
“50. To Christian students, relaxation up to 10 per cent is given. The Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates who are having a minimum of 50 per cent of
marks are called for interview for selection to Honours courses. For B.A. pass course,
a further concession to them is granted and the qualifying marks are reduced even
below 50 per cent. As far as sportsmen and sportswomen are concerned, national or
State level players are given concession normally up to 10 per cent and in exceptional
cases up to 15 per cent or even more. However, a Christian student, who is below the
cut-off percentage by more than 10 per cent is never called for interview.
51. The actual working of the concession given by the College and the result achieved
thereon in several years are set out in Annexure I to Writ Petition No. 1868 of 1980.
The Christian students who get concession up to 10 per cent and thereby get
preferential admission are only 6 per cent to 10 per cent. They are also admitted in
accordance with the standard prescribed by the University and none who falls below
the standard has ever been admitted to the College.” SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others 28.3 The majority
Judgment, then, considered the matter from the perspective of “Rights of Minorities
and Balancing Interest” and observed:-
“101. Laws carving out the rights of minorities in Article 30(1) however, must not be
arbitrary, invidious or unjustified; they must have a reasonable relation between the
aim and the means employed. The individual rights will necessarily have to be
balanced with competing minority interests. In Sidhajbhai case10 the government
order directing the minority run college to reserve 80 per cent of seats for
government nominees and permitting only 20 per cent of seats for the management
with a threat to withhold the grant-in-aid and recognition was struck down by the
Court as infringing the fundamental freedom guaranteed by Article 30(1). Attention
may also be drawn to Article 337 of the Constitution which provided a special
concession to Anglo-Indian community for ten years from the commencement of the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
47

Constitution. Unlike Article 30(2) it conferred a positive right on the Anglo-Indian
community to get grants from the government for their educational institutions, but
subject to the condition that at least 40 per cent of annual admission were made
available to members of other communities.
102. In the light of all these principles and factors, and in view of the importance
which the Constitution attaches to protective measures to minorities under Article
30(1), the minority aided educational institutions are entitled to prefer their
community candidates to maintain the minority character of the institutions subject
of course to conformity with the University standard. The State may regulate the
intake in this category with due regard to the need of the community in the area
which the institution is intended to serve. But in no case such intake shall exceed 50
per cent of the annual admission. The SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others minority institutions shall make
available at least 50 per cent of the annual admission to members of communities
other than the minority community. The admission of other community candidates
shall be done purely on the basis of merit.” 28.4 It was also observed that regulations
which serve the interest of students and teachers and preserve the uniformity in
standards of education amongst the affiliated institutions could validly be made. The
relevant discussion in para 59 was as under:-
“59. The need for a detailed study on this aspect is indeed not necessary. The right to
minorities whether religious or linguistic, to administer educational institutions and
the power of the State to regulate academic matters and management is now fairly
well settled. The right to administer does not include the right to maladminister. The
State being the controlling authority has right and duty to regulate all academic
matters. Regulations which will serve the interests of students and teachers, and to
preserve the uniformity in standards of education among the affiliated institutions
could be made. The minority institutions cannot claim immunity against such general
pattern and standard or against general laws such as laws relating to law and order,
health, hygiene, labour relations, social welfare legislations, contracts, torts etc.
which are applicable to all communities. So long as the basic right of minorities to
manage educational institution is not taken away, the State is competent to make
regulatory legislation. Regulations, however, shall not have the effect of depriving the
right of minorities to educate their children in their own institution. That is a
privilege which is implied in the right conferred by Article 30(1)”.
(Emphasis supplied) SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others 28.5 The dissenting opinion of Kasliwal, J. quoted a
passage from the Constituent Assembly Debates (CAD) touching upon the matter in
issue as under :-
“137. These were Articles 23(1) on the one hand and 23(3)(a) and 23(3)(b) on the
other hand in the Draft Constitution. Firstly, Dr B.R. Ambedkar said in relation to
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
48

draft Article 23(2) corresponding to the present Article 28 of the Constitution that
even in relation to Articles 30 and 29 the State was completely free to give or not to
give aid to the educational institutions of the religious or linguistic minorities. He
said20:
“Now, with regard to the second clause I think it has not been sufficiently well
understood. We have tried to reconcile the claim of a community which has started
educational institutions for the advancement of its own children either in education
or in cultural matters, to permit to give religious instruction in such institutions;
notwithstanding the fact that it receives certain aid from the State. The State, of
course, is free to give aid, is free not to give aid; the only limitation we have placed is
this, that the State shall not debar the institution from claiming aid under its
grant-in-aid code merely on the ground that it is run and maintained by a community
and not maintained by a public body. We have there provided also a further
qualification, that while it is free to give religious instruction in the institution and
the grant made by the State shall not be a bar to the giving of such instruction, it shall
not give instruction to, or make it compulsory upon, the children belonging to other
communities unless and until they obtain the consent of the parents of these 20 VII
CAD 884 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others children. That, I think, is a salutary provision. It performs two
functions… Shri H.V. Kamath: On a point of clarification what about institutions and
schools run by a community or a minority for its own pupils — not a school where all
communities are mixed but a school run by the community for its own pupils?
The Hon’ble Dr B.R. Ambedkar: If my friend, Mr Kamath will read the other article he will see that
once an institution, whether maintained by the community or not, gets a grant, the condition is that
it shall keep the school open to all communities. That provision he has not read.”
138. He reaffirmed the freedom of the State to give or not to give aid to these schools when directly
referring to draft Article 23 which is the precursor of the present Articles 29 and 30 as follows21:
“I think another thing which has to be borne in reading Article 23 is that it does not
impose any obligation or burden upon the State. It does not say that, when for
instance the Madras people come to Bombay, the Bombay Government shall be
required by law to finance any project of giving education either in Tamil language or
in Andhra language or any other language. There is no burden cast upon the State.
The only limitation that is imposed by Article 23 is that if there is a cultural minority
which wants to preserve its language, its script and its culture, the State shall not by
law impose upon it any other culture which may be either local or otherwise.” And,
went on to observe that once an institution was receiving aid, “it must abide by the
rigor of Article 29(2) in the matter of admission of 21 VII CAD 923 SK. MD. Rafique
vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others students in
the college” and “as already held by me, St. Stephen’s College and Allahabad
Agricultural Institute are not entitled to claim any preferential right or reservation in
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
49

favour of students of Christian community as they are getting grant-in-aid and as
such I do not consider it necessary to labour any more on the question of deciding as
to what percentage can be considered as reasonable”
29. We must also refer to two decisions of this Court after the decision in Ahmedabad
St. Xaviers College5 where the appointment of Principal of a minority educational
institution was in question.
29.1 In Board of Secondary Education and Teachers Training v. Jt.
Director of Public Instructions, Sagar and others22, a Bench of two Judges of this Court observed:
“3. The decisions of this Court make it clear that in the matter of appointment of the
Principal, the management of a minority educational institution has a choice. It has
been held that one of the incidents of the right to administer a minority educational
institution is the selection of the Principal. Any rules which take away this right of the
management have been held to be interfering with the right guaranteed by Article 30
of the Constitution. In this case, both Julius Prasad selected by the management and
the third respondent are qualified and eligible for appointment as Principal according
to rules. The 22 (1998) 8 SCC 555 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others question is whether the management is not
entitled to select a person of their choice. The decisions of this Court including the
decision in State of Kerala v. Very Rev. Mother Provincial and Ahmedabad St.
Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat make it clear that this right of the minority
educational institution cannot be taken away by any rules or regulations or by any
enactment made by the State. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the High Court
was not right in holding otherwise. The State has undoubtedly the power to regulate
the affairs of the minority educational institutions also in the interest of discipline
and excellence. But in that process, the aforesaid right of the management cannot be
taken away, even if the Government is giving hundred per cent grant. We need not go
into any other question in this appeal.” (Emphasis supplied) 29.2 In N. Ammad v.
Manager, Emjay High School and others 23 a Bench of two Judges of this Court,
while dealing with the issue “whether the management of a minority school was free
to choose and appoint any qualified person as Headmaster” observed as under:
“18. Selection and appointment of Headmaster in a school (or Principal of a college)
are of prime importance in administration of that educational institution. The
Headmaster is the key post in the running of the school. He is the hub on which all
the spokes of the school are set around whom they rotate to generate result. A school
is personified through its Headmaster and he is the focal point on which outsiders
look at the school. A bad Headmaster can spoil the entire institution, an efficient and
honest Headmaster can improve it by leaps and bounds. The functional efficacy of a
school very much depends upon the efficiency and dedication of its Headmaster. This
pristine precept remains unchanged despite many 23 (1998) 6 SCC 674 SK. MD.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
50

Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
changes taking place in the structural patterns of education over the years.
19. How important is the post of Headmaster of a school has been pithily stated by a
Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Aldo Maria Patroni v. E.C. Kesavan. Chief
Justice M.S. Menon has, in a style which is inimitable, stated thus:
“The post of the headmaster is of pivotal importance in the life of a school. Around
him wheels the tone and temper of the institution; on him depends the continuity of
its traditions, the maintenance of discipline and the efficiency of its teaching. The
right to choose the headmaster is perhaps the most important facet of the right to
administer a school, and we must hold that the imposition of any trammel thereon —
except to the extent of prescribing the requisite qualifications and experience —
cannot but be considered as a violation of the right guaranteed by Article 30(1) of the
Constitution. To hold otherwise will be to make the right ‘a teasing illusion, a promise
of unreality’.”
20. The importance of the key role which a Headmaster plays in the school cannot be
better delineated than that. The nine-Judge Bench in the Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s
College Society has highlighted the importance of the role of the Principal of a
college. In support of majority view in that decision K.K. Mathew, J. has observed
thus: (SCC pp.
815-16, para 182) “182. It is upon the principal and teachers of a college that the tone and temper of
an educational institution depend. On them would depend its reputation, the maintenance of
discipline and its efficiency in teaching. The right to choose the principal and to have the teaching
conducted by teachers appointed by SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others the management after an overall assessment of their outlook and
philosophy is perhaps the most important facet of the right to administer an educational
institution.”
21. H.R. Khanna, J. has adopted a still broader view that even selection of teachers is of great
importance in the right to manage a school. Learned Judge has stated thus: (SCC p. 789, para 103)
“The selection and appointment of teachers for an educational institution is one of the essential
ingredients of the right to manage an educational institution and the minorities can plainly be not
denied such right of selection and appointment without infringing Article 30(1).”
22. Krishna Iyer, J. who dissented from the majority view in Gandhi Faiz-E-Am College v. University
of Agra has, nevertheless, emphasised the importance of the post of the Principal in the following
words: (SCC p. 293, para 21) “21. An activist principal is an asset in discharging these duties which
are inextricably interlaced with academic functions. The principal is an invaluable insider — the
Management’s own choice — not an outsider answerable to the Vice-
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
51

Chancellor. He brings into the work of the Managing Committee that intimate acquaintance with
educational operations and that necessary expression of student-teacher aspirations and complaints
which are so essential for the minority institution to achieve a happy marriage between individuality
and excellence.”
23. Whatever is said about the importance of the post of Principal of a college vis-à-vis the
administration of the institution would in pari materia apply to the Headmaster of a school with
equal force.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
24. If management of the school is not given very wide freedom to choose the personnel for holding
such a key post, subject of course to the restrictions regarding qualifications to be prescribed by the
State, the right to administer the school would get much diminished.” (Emphasis supplied) B)
Decision in TMA Pai Foundation
30. A Bench of Eleven Judges was constituted to consider questions touching upon the rights of
Minority Educational Institutions under Articles 29 and 30 of the Constitution. The reasons why the
Bench of that strength was constituted were set out in brief in paragraph No.3 of the leading
Judgment authored by Kirpal, C.J. as under:
“3. The hearing of these cases has had a chequered history. Writ Petition No. 350 of
1993 filed by the Islamic Academy of Education and connected petitions were placed
before a Bench of five Judges. As the Bench was prima facie of the opinion that
Article 30 did not clothe a minority educational institution with the power to adopt
its own method of selection and the correctness of the decision of this Court in St.
Stephen’s College v. University of Delhi was doubted, it was directed that the
questions that arose should be authoritatively answered by a larger Bench. These
cases were then placed before a Bench of seven Judges. The questions framed were
recast and on 6-2-1997, the Court directed that the matter be placed before a Bench
of at least eleven Judges, as it was felt that in view of the Forty-second Amendment to
the Constitution, whereby “education” had been included in Entry 25 of List III of
Seventh Schedule, the question of who would be regarded as a SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others “minority” was
required to be considered because the earlier case-law related to the pre-amendment
era, when education was only in the State List. When the cases came up for hearing
before an eleven-Judge Bench, during the course of hearing on 19-3-1997, the
following order was passed:
“Since a doubt has arisen during the course of our arguments as to whether this
Bench would feel itself bound by the ratio propounded in — Kerala Education Bill,
1957, In Re and Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College Society v. State of Gujarat it is
clarified that this sized Bench would not feel itself inhibited by the views expressed in
those cases since the present endeavour is to discern the true scope and
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
52

interpretation of Article 30(1) of the Constitution, which being the dominant question
would require examination in its pristine purity. The factum is recorded.”
31. The Bench framed 11 questions. For the present discussion we are principally concerned with
discussion relevant to question Nos.4 and 5.
Under heading- “3. In case private institutions can be governmental regulations and if so, to what
extent?”, the discussion was under various sub-headings. The first sub-heading was “private
unaided non-minority educational institutions”. Under this sub-heading para 50 of the leading
Judgment enumerated what “the right to establish and administer” comprises of, as under:
“50. The right to establish and administer broadly comprises the following rights:
(a) to admit students;
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure;
(c) to constitute a governing body;
(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); and
(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any employees.” The other
sub-headings were “private unaided professional colleges”, “private aided professional institutions
(non-minority)” and “other aided institutions”. Since the discussion under these sub-headings as
well as the next heading does not strictly deal with the matter in the context of minority educational
institutions, we may turn to the next heading “5. To what extent can the rights of aided private
minority institutions to administer be regulated?” 31.1. After discussing about the extent of right
under Article 30 of the Constitution, the leading Judgment considered all the relevant cases on the
point. The following paragraphs are noteworthy:
“90. In the exercise of this right to conserve the language, script or culture, that
section of the society can set up educational institutions. The right to establish and
maintain educational institutions of its choice is a necessary concomitant to the right
conferred by Article 30. The right under Article 30 is not absolute. Article 29(2)
provides that, where any educational institution is maintained by the State or
receives aid out of State funds, no citizen shall be denied admission on the grounds
only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. The use of the expression “any
educational institution” in Article 29(2) would (sic not) refer to any educational SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
institution established by anyone, but which is maintained by the State or receives
aid out of State funds. In other words, on a plain reading, State- maintained or aided
educational institutions, whether established by the Government or the majority or a
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
53

minority community cannot deny admission to a citizen on the grounds only of
religion, race, caste or language.
93. Can Article 30(1) be so read as to mean that it contains an absolute right of the
minorities, whether based on religion or language, to establish and administer
educational institutions in any manner they desire, and without being obliged to
comply with the provisions of any law? Does Article 30(1) give the religious or
linguistic minorities a right to establish an educational institution that propagates
religious or racial bigotry or ill will amongst the people? Can the right under Article
30(1) be so exercised that it is opposed to public morality or health? In the exercise of
its right, would the minority while establishing educational institutions not be bound
by town planning rules and regulations? Can they construct and maintain buildings
in any manner they desire without complying with the provisions of the building
bye-laws or health regulations?
… … …
105. In Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai v. State of Bombay this Court had to consider the
validity of an order issued by the Government of Bombay whereby from the academic
year 1955-56, 80% of the seats in the training colleges for teachers in
non-government training colleges were to be reserved for the teachers nominated by
the Government. The petitioners, who belonged to the minority community, were,
inter alia, running a training college for teachers, as also primary schools. The said
primary schools and college were conducted for the benefit of the religious
denomination of the United Church of Northern India and Indian Christians
generally, though admission was not denied to students belonging to other
communities. The petitioners challenged the government order requiring 80% of the
seats to be SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others filled by nominees of the Government, inter alia, on the ground
that the petitioners were members of a religious denomination and that they
constituted a religious minority, and that the educational institutions had been
established primarily for the benefit of the Christian community. It was the case of
the petitioners that the decision of the Government violated their fundamental rights
guaranteed by Articles 30(1), 26(a), (b), (c) and (d), and 19(1)(f) and
(g). While interpreting Article 30, it was observed by this Court at SCR pp. 849-50 as
under:
“All minorities, linguistic or religious have by Article 30(1) an absolute right to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice; and any law or
executive direction which seeks to infringe the substance of that right under Article
30(1) would to that extent be void. This, however, is not to say that it is not open to
the State to impose regulations upon the exercise of this right. The fundamental
freedom is to establish and to administer educational institutions: it is a right to
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
54

establish and administer what are in truth educational institutions, institutions which
cater to the educational needs of the citizens, or sections thereof. Regulation made in
the true interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality,
public order and the like may undoubtedly be imposed. Such regulations are not
restrictions on the substance of the right which is guaranteed: they secure the proper
functioning of the institution, in matters educational.”
106. While coming to the conclusion that the right of the private training colleges to
admit students of their choice was severely restricted, this Court referred to the
opinion in Kerala Education Bill, 1957 case but distinguished it by observing that the
Court did not, in that case, lay down any test of reasonableness of the regulation. No
general principle on which the reasonableness of a regulation may be tested was SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
sought to be laid down in Kerala Education Bill, 1957 case and, therefore, it was held
in Sidhajbhai Sabhai case that the opinion in that case was not an authority for the
proposition that all regulative measures, which were not destructive or annihilative of
the character of the institution established by the minority, provided the regulations
were in the national or public interest, were valid. In this connection it was further
held at SCR pp. 856-57, as follows:
“The right established by Article 30(1) is a fundamental right declared in terms
absolute. Unlike the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Article 19, it is not subject
to reasonable restrictions. It is intended to be a real right for the protection of the
minorities in the matter of setting up of educational institutions of their own choice.
The right is intended to be effective and is not to be whittled down by so- called
regulative measures conceived in the interest not of the minority educational
institution, but of the public or the nation as a whole. If every order which while
maintaining the formal character of a minority institution destroys the power of
administration is held justifiable because it is in the public or national interest,
though not in its interest as an educational institution, the right guaranteed by Article
30(1) will be but a ‘teasing illusion’, a promise of unreality. Regulations which may
lawfully be imposed either by legislative or executive action as a condition of
receiving grant or of recognition must be directed to making the institution while
retaining its character as a minority institution effective as an educational institution.
Such regulation must satisfy a dual test — the test of reasonableness, and the test that
it is regulative of the educational character of the institution and is conducive to
making the institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority community
or other persons who resort to it.” SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
107. The aforesaid decision does indicate that the right under Article 30(1) is not so
absolute as to prevent the Government from making any regulation whatsoever. As
already noted hereinabove, in Sidhajbhai Sabhai case it was laid down that
regulations made in the true interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health,
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
55

sanitation, morality and public order could be imposed. If this is so, it is difficult to
appreciate how the Government can be prevented from framing regulations that are
in the national interest, as it seems to be indicated in the passage quoted
hereinabove. Any regulation framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to
all educational institutions, whether run by the majority or the minority. Such a
limitation must necessarily be read into Article 30. The right under Article 30(1)
cannot be such as to override the national interest or to prevent the Government
from framing regulations in that behalf. It is, of course, true that government
regulations cannot destroy the minority character of the institution or make the right
to establish and administer a mere illusion; but the right under Article 30 is not so
absolute as to be above the law. It will further be seen that in Sidhajbhai Sabhai case
no reference was made to Article 29(2) of the Constitution. This decision, therefore,
cannot be an authority for the proposition canvassed before us.” (Emphasis supplied)
31.2. The leading Judgment thereafter considered the decision of this Court in
Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5, and while quoting certain passages therefrom, it
was observed:
“119. In a concurrent judgment, while noting (at SCC p. 770, para 73) that “clause (2)
of Article 29 forbids the denial of admission to citizens into any educational
institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them”, SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Khanna, J. then examined
Article 30, and observed at SCR p. 222, as follows: (SCC p. 770, para 74) “74. Clause
(1) of Article 30 gives right to all minorities, whether based on religion or language, to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Analysing that
clause it would follow that the right which has been conferred by the clause is on two
types of minorities. Those minorities may be based either on religion or on language.
The right conferred upon the said minorities is to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice. The word ‘establish’ indicates the right to
bring into existence, while the right to administer an institution means the right to
effectively manage and conduct the affairs of the institution. Administration connotes
management of the affairs of the institution. The management must be free of control
so that the founders or their nominees can mould the institution as they think fit and
in accordance with their ideas of how the interest of the community in general and
the institution in particular will be best served. The words ‘of their choice’ qualify the
educational institutions and show that the educational institutions established and
administered by the minorities need not be of some particular class; the minorities
have the right and freedom to establish and administer such educational institutions
as they choose. Clause (2) of Article 30 prevents the State from making
discrimination in the matter of grant of aid to any educational institution on the
ground that the institution is under the management of a minority, whether based on
religion or language.”
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
56

120. Explaining the rationale behind Article 30, it was observed at SCR p. 224, as
follows: (SCC p. 772, para
77) SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others “77. The idea of giving some special rights to the minorities is not to have
a kind of a privileged or pampered section of the population but to give to the
minorities a sense of security and a feeling of confidence. The great leaders of India
since time immemorial had preached the doctrine of tolerance and catholicity of
outlook. Those noble ideas were enshrined in the Constitution. Special rights for
minorities were designed not to create inequality. Their real effect was to bring about
equality by ensuring the preservation of the minority institutions and by
guaranteeing to the minorities autonomy in the matter of the administration of those
institutions. The differential treatment for the minorities by giving them special
rights is intended to bring about an equilibrium, so that the ideal of equality may not
be reduced to a mere abstract idea but should become a living reality and result in
true, genuine equality, an equality not merely in theory but also in fact.”
121. While advocating that provisions of the Constitution should be construed
according to the liberal, generous and sympathetic approach, and after considering
the principles which could be discerned by him from the earlier decisions of this
Court, Khanna, J., observed at SCR p. 234, as follows: (SCC p. 781, para 89) “The
minorities are as much children of the soil as the majority and the approach has been
to ensure that nothing should be done as might deprive the minorities of a sense of
belonging, of a feeling of security, of a consciousness of equality and of the awareness
that the conservation of their religion, culture, language and script as also the
protection of their educational institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the
Constitution. The same generous, liberal and sympathetic approach should weigh
with the courts in construing SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Articles 29 and 30 as marked the
deliberations of the Constitution-makers in drafting those articles and making them
part of the fundamental rights. The safeguarding of the interest of the minorities
amongst sections of population is as important as the protection of the interest
amongst individuals of persons who are below the age of majority or are otherwise
suffering from some kind of infirmity. The Constitution and the laws made by
civilized nations, therefore, generally contain provisions for the protection of those
interests. It can, indeed, be said to be an index of the level of civilization and
catholicity of a nation as to how far their minorities feel secure and are not subject to
any discrimination or suppression.”
122. The learned Judge then observed that the right of the minorities to administer
educational institutions did not prevent the making of reasonable regulations in
respect of these institutions. Recognizing that the right to administer educational
institutions could not include the right to maladminister, it was held that regulations
could be lawfully imposed, for the receiving of grants and recognition, while
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
57

permitting the institution to retain its character as a minority institution. The
regulation “must satisfy a dual test — the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is
regulative of the educational character of the institution and is conducive to making
the institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority community or other
persons who resort to it”. (SCC p.
783, para 92) It was permissible for the authorities to prescribe regulations, which must be complied
with, before a minority institution could seek or retain affiliation and recognition. But it was also
stated that the regulations made by the authority should not impinge upon the minority character of
the institution. Therefore, a balance has to be kept between the two objectives — that of ensuring the
standard of excellence of the institution, and that of preserving the right of the minorities to
establish and administer their educational institutions. Regulations that embraced SK. MD. Rafique
vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others and reconciled the two
objectives could be considered to be reasonable. This, in our view, is the correct approach to the
problem.
123. After referring to the earlier cases in relation to the appointment of teachers, it was noted by
Khanna, J., that the conclusion which followed was that a law which interfered with a minority’s
choice of qualified teachers, or its disciplinary control over teachers and other members of the staff
of the institution, was void, as it was violative of Article 30(1). While it was permissible for the State
and its educational authorities to prescribe the qualifications of teachers, it was held that once the
teachers possessing the requisite qualifications were selected by the minorities for their educational
institutions, the State would have no right to veto the selection of those teachers. The selection and
appointment of teachers for an educational institution was regarded as one of the essential
ingredients under Article 30(1). The Court’s attention was drawn to the fact that in Kerala Education
Bill, 1957 case this Court had opined that clauses 11 and 12 made it obligatory for all aided schools to
select teachers from a panel selected from each district by the Public Service Commission and that
no teacher of an aided school could be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank without the previous
sanction of the authorized officer. At SCC p. 792, Khanna, J., observed that in cases subsequent to
the opinion in Kerala Education Bill, 1957 case9 this Court had held similar provisions as clause 11
and clause 12 to be violative of Article 30(1) (sic in the case) of the minority institutions. He then
observed as follows: (SCC p. 792, para 109) “The opinion expressed by this Court in Re Kerala
Education Bill, 1957 was of an advisory character and though great weight should be attached to it
because of its persuasive value, the said opinion cannot override the opinion subsequently expressed
by this Court in contested cases. It is the law declared by this Court in the subsequent contested
cases which would have a binding SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others effect. The words ‘as at present advised’ as well as the preceding
sentence indicate that the view expressed by this Court in Re Kerala Education Bill, 1957 in this
respect was hesitant and tentative and not a final view in the matter.” (Emphasis supplied) 31.3.
After considering all the decisions, the matter was summed up as under:
“135. We agree with the contention of the learned Solicitor-General that the
Constitution in Part III does not contain or give any absolute right. All rights
conferred in Part III of the Constitution are subject to at least other provisions of the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
58

said Part. It is difficult to comprehend that the framers of the Constitution would
have given such an absolute right to the religious or linguistic minorities, which
would enable them to establish and administer educational institutions in a manner
so as to be in conflict with the other Parts of the Constitution. We find it difficult to
accept that in the establishment and administration of educational institutions by the
religious and linguistic minorities, no law of the land, even the Constitution, is to
apply to them.
137. It follows from the aforesaid decisions that even though the words of Article
30(1) are unqualified, this Court has held that at least certain other laws of the land
pertaining to health, morality and standards of education apply. The right under
Article 30(1) has, therefore, not been held to be absolute or above other provisions of
the law, and we reiterate the same. By the same analogy, there is no reason why
regulations or conditions concerning, generally, the welfare of students and teachers
should not be made applicable in order to provide a proper academic atmosphere, as
such provisions do not in any way interfere with the right of administration or
management under Article 30(1).
138. As we look at it, Article 30(1) is a sort of guarantee or assurance to the linguistic
and religious SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others minority institutions of their right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice.
Secularism and equality being two of the basic features of the Constitution, Article 30(1) ensures
protection to the linguistic and religious minorities, thereby preserving the secularism of the
country. Furthermore, the principles of equality must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of such
rights. No law can be framed that will discriminate against such minorities with regard to the
establishment and administration of educational institutions vis-à-vis other educational
institutions. Any law or rule or regulation that would put the educational institutions run by the
minorities at a disadvantage when compared to the institutions run by the others will have to be
struck down. At the same time, there also cannot be any reverse discrimination. It was observed in
St. Xavier’s College case5 at SCR p. 192 that :
(SCC p. 743, para 9) “The whole object of conferring the right on minorities under
Article 30 is to ensure that there will be equality between the majority and the
minority. If the minorities do not have such special protection they will be denied
equality.” In other words, the essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment
between the majority and the minority institutions. No one type or category of
institution should be disfavoured or, for that matter, receive more favourable
treatment than another. Laws of the land, including rules and regulations, must apply
equally to the majority institutions as well as to the minority institutions. The
minority institutions must be allowed to do what the non-minority institutions are
permitted to do.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
59

139. Like any other private unaided institutions, similar unaided educational
institutions administered by linguistic or religious minorities are assured maximum
autonomy in relation thereto; e.g. method of recruitment of teachers, charging of fees
and SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others admission of students. They will have to comply with the conditions of
recognition, which cannot be such as to whittle down the right under Article 30.”
(Emphasis supplied) 31.4. The matter was then considered in the context where aid
was being received by the concerned minority institution and to what extent its
autonomy in administration, could be curtailed or regulated. It was observed:
“144. It cannot be argued that no conditions can be imposed while giving aid to a
minority institution. Whether it is an institution run by the majority or the minority,
all conditions that have relevance to the proper utilization of the grant-in-aid by an
educational institution can be imposed. All that Article 30(2) states is that on the
ground that an institution is under the management of a minority, whether based on
religion or language, grant of aid to that educational institution cannot be
discriminated against, if other educational institutions are entitled to receive aid. The
conditions for grant or non-grant of aid to educational institutions have to be
uniformly applied, whether it is a majority-run institution or a minority-run
institution. As in the case of a majority-run institution, the moment a minority
institution obtains a grant of aid, Article 28 of the Constitution comes into play.
When an educational institution is maintained out of State funds, no religious
instruction can be provided therein. Article 28(1) does not state that it applies only to
educational institutions that are not established or maintained by religious or
linguistic minorities. Furthermore, upon the receipt of aid, the provisions of Article
28(3) would apply to all educational institutions whether run by the minorities or the
non- minorities. Article 28(3) is the right of a person studying in a State-recognized
institution or in an educational institution receiving aid from State funds, not to take
part in any religious instruction, if imparted by such institution, without his/her
consent SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others (or his/her guardian’s consent if such a person is a minor).
Just as Articles 28(1) and (3) become applicable the moment any educational
institution takes aid, likewise, Article 29(2) would also be attracted and become
applicable to an educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out
of State funds. It was strenuously contended that the right to give admission is one of
the essential ingredients of the right to administer conferred on the religious or
linguistic minority, and that this right should not be curtailed in any manner. It is
difficult to accept this contention. If Articles 28(1) and (3) apply to a minority
institution that receives aid out of State funds, there is nothing in the language of
Article 30 that would make the provisions of Article 29(2) inapplicable. Like Article
28(1) and Article 28(3), Article 29(2) refers to “any educational institution
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds”. A minority institution
would fall within the ambit of Article 29(2) in the same manner in which Article 28(1)
and Article 28(3) would be applicable to an aided minority institution. It is true that
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
60

one of the rights to administer an educational institution is to grant admission to the
students. As long as an educational institution, whether belonging to the minority or
the majority community, does not receive aid, it would, in our opinion, be its right
and discretion to grant admission to such students as it chooses or selects subject to
what has been clarified before. Out of the various rights that the minority institution
has in the administration of the institution, Article 29(2) curtails the right to grant
admission to a certain extent. By virtue of Article 29(2), no citizen can be denied
admission by an aided minority institution on the grounds only of religion, race,
caste, language or any of them. It is no doubt true that Article 29(2) does curtail one
of the powers of the minority institution, but on receiving aid, some of the rights that
an unaided minority institution has, are also curtailed by Articles 28(1) and 28(3). A
minority educational institution has a right to impart religious instruction — this
right is taken away by Article 28(1), if that minority institution is maintained wholly
out of State funds. Similarly on receiving aid out of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others State funds or on being
recognized by the State, the absolute right of a minority institution requiring a
student to attend religious instruction is curtailed by Article 28(3). If the curtailment
of the right to administer a minority institution on receiving aid or being wholly
maintained out of State funds as provided by Article 28 is valid, there is no reason
why Article 29(2) should not be held to be applicable. There is nothing in the
language of Articles 28(1) and (3), Article 29(2) and Article 30 to suggest that, on
receiving aid, Articles 28(1) and (3) will apply, but Article 29(2) will not. Therefore,
the contention that the institutions covered by Article 30 are outside the injunction of
Article 29(2) cannot be accepted.
… … …
151. The right of the aided minority institution to preferably admit students of its
community, when Article 29(2) was applicable, has been clarified by this Court over a
decade ago in St. Stephen’s College case. While upholding the procedure for
admitting students, this Court also held that aided minority educational institutions
were entitled to preferably admit their community candidates so as to maintain the
minority character of the institution, and that the State may regulate the intake in
this category with due regard to the area that the institution was intended to serve,
but that this intake should not be more than 50% in any case. Thus, St. Stephen’s
endeavoured to strike a balance between the two articles. Though we accept the ratio
of St. Stephen’s which has held the field for over a decade, we have compelling
reservations in accepting the rigid percentage stipulated therein. As Article 29 and
Article 30 apply not only to institutions of higher education but also to schools, a
ceiling of 50% would not be proper. It will be more appropriate that, depending upon
the level of the institution, whether it be a primary or secondary or high school or a
college, professional or otherwise, and on the population and educational needs of
the area in which the institution is to be located, the State properly balances the
interests of all by providing for such a percentage of students of the minority SK. MD.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
61

Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
community to be admitted, so as to adequately serve the interest of the community
for which the institution was established.
152. At the same time, the admissions to aided institutions, whether awarded to
minority or non-
minority students, cannot be at the absolute sweet will and pleasure of the management of minority
educational institutions. As the regulations to promote academic excellence and standards do not
encroach upon the guaranteed rights under Article 30, the aided minority educational institutions
can be required to observe inter se merit amongst the eligible minority applicants and passage of
common entrance test by the candidates, where there is one, with regard to admissions in
professional and non-professional colleges. If there is no such test, a rational method of assessing
comparative merit has to be evolved. As regards the non-minority segment, admission may be on
the basis of the common entrance test and counselling by a State agency. In the courses for which
such a test and counselling are not in vogue, admission can be on the basis of relevant criteria for
the determination of merit. It would be open to the State authorities to insist on allocating a certain
percentage of seats to those belonging to weaker sections of society, from amongst the non-minority
seats.” (Emphasis supplied) 31.5. Finally, as regards Question No.5(c), the leading judgment gave its
answer as under:-
“Q. 5. (c) Whether the statutory provisions which regulate the facets of
administration like control over educational agencies, control over governing bodies,
conditions of affiliation including recognition/withdrawal thereof, and appointment
of staff, employees, teachers and principals including their service conditions and
regulation of fees, etc. SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others would interfere with the right of administration of
minorities?
A. So far as the statutory provisions regulating the facets of administration are
concerned, in case of an unaided minority educational institution, the regulatory
measure of control should be minimal and the conditions of recognition as well as the
conditions of affiliation to a university or board have to be complied with, but in the
matter of day-to-day management, like the appointment of staff, teaching and
non-teaching, and administrative control over them, the management should have
the freedom and there should not be any external controlling agency. However, a
rational procedure for the selection of teaching staff and for taking disciplinary action
has to be evolved by the management itself.
For redressing the grievances of employees of aided and unaided institutions who are
subjected to punishment or termination from service, a mechanism will have to be
evolved, and in our opinion, appropriate tribunals could be constituted, and till then,
such tribunals could be presided over by a judicial officer of the rank of District
Judge.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
62

The State or other controlling authorities, however, can always prescribe the
minimum qualification, experience and other conditions bearing on the merit of an
individual for being appointed as a teacher or a principal of any educational
institution.
“Regulations can be framed governing service conditions for teaching and other staff
for whom aid is provided by the State, without interfering with the overall
administrative control of the management over the staff.
Fees to be charged by unaided institutions cannot be regulated but no institution
should charge capitation fee.” C) Decisions after TMA Pai Foundation SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
32. In Brahmo Samaj Education Society vs. State of West Bengal 24, a Bench of two Judges dealt
with the issue that arose as under:-
“5. The main question for consideration is, whether the appointment of teachers
through the selection of the College Service Commission is permissible or not, in
other words, to decipher the role of the State in the matter of appointment of
teachers. To establish and administer an educational institution is held to be a right
coming under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution as enunciated in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation v. State of Karnataka8. According to Article 19(6) of the Constitution, the
right to establish and maintain an educational institution is subject to the reasonable
restrictions imposed by the State in the interest of general public. At the same time,
subject to public order, morality and health, every religious denomination or any
section thereof can establish and maintain educational institutions under Article
26(a) of the Constitution. Reading Article 19(1)(g) and Article 26(a) of the
Constitution together, the petitioners have a right to establish and maintain
educational institutions and hence we do not think it is necessary to decide the issue
of minority/denominational status of Brahmo Samaj to decide the issue in hand. In
our view, this issue does not arise in the context of the present case.
6. The question now before us is to decide whether the appointment of teachers in an
aided institution by the College Service Commission by restricting the petitioners’
right to appointment is a reasonable restriction in the interest of general public or
not. The petitioners have a right to establish and administer educational institution.
Merely because the petitioners are receiving aid, their autonomy of administration
cannot be totally restricted and institutions cannot be treated as a
government-owned one. Of course the State can impose such conditions as are
necessary for the proper maintenance of standards of education and 24 (2004) 6 SCC
224 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others to check maladministration. It is stated in T.M.A. Pai8 that:
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
63

“71. While giving aid to professional institutions, it would be permissible for the
authority giving aid to prescribe by rules or regulations, the conditions on the basis of
which admission will be granted to different aided colleges by virtue of merit, coupled
with the reservation policy of the State. The merit may be determined either through
a common entrance test conducted by the university or the Government followed by
counselling, or on the basis of an entrance test conducted by individual institutions —
the method to be followed is for the university or the Government to decide. The
authority may also devise other means to ensure that admission is granted to an
aided professional institution on the basis of merit. In the case of such institutions, it
will be permissible for the Government or the university to provide that
consideration should be shown to the weaker sections of the society. (SCC at p. 550,
para
71)
72. Once aid is granted to a private professional educational institution, the
Government or the State agency, as a condition of the grant of aid, can put fetters on
the freedom in the matter of administration and management of the institution. The
State, which gives aid to an educational institution, can impose such conditions as are
necessary for the proper maintenance of the high standards of education as the
financial burden is shared by the State. The State would also be under an obligation
to protect the interest of the teaching and non-teaching staff. In many States, there
are various statutory provisions to regulate the functioning of such educational
institutions where the States give, as a grant or aid, a substantial proportion of the
revenue SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others expenditure including salary, pay and allowances of teaching
and non-teaching staff.
It would be its responsibility to ensure that the teachers working in those institutions are governed
by proper service conditions. The State, in the case of such aided institutions, has ample power to
regulate the method of selection and appointment of teachers after prescribing requisite
qualifications for the same. Ever since in Kerala Education Bill, 1957, Re9 this Court has upheld, in
the case of aided institutions, those regulations that served the interests of students and teachers.
Checks on the administration may be necessary in order to ensure that the administration is
efficient and sound and will serve the academic needs of the institutions. In other words, rules and
regulations that promote good administration and prevent maladministration can be formulated so
as to promote the efficiency of teachers, discipline and fairness in administration and to preserve
harmony among affiliated institutions. At the same time it has to be ensured that even an aided
institution does not become a government-
owned and controlled institution. Normally, the aid that is granted is relatable to the pay and
allowances of the teaching staff. In addition, the management of the private aided institutions has to
incur revenue and capital expenses. Such aided institutions cannot obtain that extent of autonomy
in relation to management and administration as would be available to a private unaided institution,
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
64

but at the same time, it cannot also be treated as an educational institution departmentally run by
Government or as a wholly owned and controlled government institution and interfere with
constitution of the governing bodies or thrusting the staff without reference to management.
73. There are a large number of educational institutions, like schools and non-professional SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others colleges, which
cannot operate without the support of aid from the State. Although these institutions may have been
established by philanthropists or other public-spirited persons, it becomes necessary, in order to
provide inexpensive education to the students, to seek aid from the State. In such cases, as those of
the professional aided institutions referred to hereinabove, the Government would be entitled to
make regulations relating to the terms and conditions of employment of the teaching and
non-teaching staff whenever the aid for the posts is given by the State as well as admission
procedures. Such rules and regulations can also provide for the reasons and the manner in which a
teacher or any other member of the staff can be removed. In other words, the autonomy of a private
aided institution would be less than that of an unaided institution.
… … …
10. When a larger Bench consisting of eleven Judges of this Court in T.M.A. Pai has declared what
the law on the matter is, we do not want to dilute the effect of the same by analysing various
statements made therein or indulge in any dissection of the principles underlying it. We would
rather state that the State Government shall take note of the declarations of law made by this Court
in this regard and make suitable amendments to their laws, rules and regulations to bring them in
conformity with the principles set out therein.”
33. In P.A. Inamdar and others v. State of Maharashtra and others25 a Bench of Seven Judges of
this Court culled out the issues which arose for its consideration as under:
25 (2005) 6 SCC 537 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
High Madrasah and Others “26. These matters have been directed to be placed for
hearing before a Bench of seven Judges under orders of the Chief Justice of India
pursuant to the order dated 15-7-2004 in P.A. Inamdar v. State of Maharashtra26
and order dated 29-7-2004 in Pushpagiri Medical Society v. State of Kerala27. The
aggrieved persons before us are again classifiable in one class, that is, unaided
minority and non-minority institutions imparting professional education. The issues
arising for decision before us are only three:
(i) the fixation of “quota” of admissions/students in respect of unaided professional
institutions;
(ii) the holding of examinations for admissions to such colleges, that is, who will hold
the entrance tests;
and
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
65

(iii) the fee structure.
The questions spelled out by orders of reference
27. In the light of the two orders of reference, referred to hereinabove, we propose to confine our
discussion to the questions set out hereunder which, according to us, arise for decision:
(1) To what extent can the State regulate admissions made by unaided (minority or
non-minority) educational institutions? Can the State enforce its policy of reservation
and/or appropriate to itself any quota in admissions to such institutions?
(2) Whether unaided (minority and non-minority) educational institutions are free to
devise their own admission procedure or whether the direction made in Islamic
Academy28 for compulsorily holding an entrance test by the State or association of
institutions and to choose therefrom the students entitled to 26 (2004) 8 SCC 139 27
(2004) 8 SCC 135 28 (2003) 6 SCC 697 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others admission in such institutions, can be
sustained in light of the law laid down in Pai Foundation?
(3) Whether Islamic Academy could have issued guidelines in the matter of regulating the fee
payable by the students to the educational institutions?
(4) Can the admission procedure and fee structure be regulated or taken over by the Committees
ordered to be constituted by Islamic Academy?” 33.1. While dealing with real purpose of Article 30
of the Constitution, it was stated:-
“70. The real purpose of Article 30 is to prevent discrimination against members of
the minority community and to place them on an equal footing with non-minority.
Reverse discrimination was not the intention of Article 30. If running of educational
institutions cannot be said to be at a higher plane than the right to carry on any other
business, reasonable restrictions similar to those placed on the right to carry on
business can be placed on educational institutions conducting professional courses.
For the purpose of these restrictions both minorities and non- minorities can be
treated at par and there would not be any violation of Article 30(1), which guarantees
only protection against oppression and discrimination of the minority from the
majority. Activities of education being essentially charitable in nature, the
educational institutions both of a non-minority and minority character can be
regulated and controlled so that they do not indulge in selling seats of learning to
make money. They can be allowed to generate such funds as would be reasonably
required to run the institute and for its further growth.” (Emphasis supplied) SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
33.2 The discussion shows that the matter was considered in the context of the rights
of unaided institutions and not with regard to “minority educational institutions
receiving State aid” as is evident from para No.123 of the decision. Para No.103 of the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
66

decision shows that minority educational institutions were classified in three
categories and para No.104 onwards points difference between professional and
non-professional educational institutions. Paragraph Nos.104 to 107 were as under:
“Difference between professional and non- professional educational institutions
104. Article 30(1) speaks of “educational institutions” generally and so does Article
29(2). These articles do not draw any distinction between an educational institution
dispensing theological education or professional or non-professional education.
However, the terrain of thought as has developed through successive judicial
pronouncements culminating in Pai Foundation is that looking at the concept of
education, in the backdrop of the constitutional provisions, professional educational
institutions constitute a class by themselves as distinguished from educational
institutions imparting non-professional education. It is not necessary for us to go
deep into this aspect of the issue posed before us inasmuch as Pai Foundation has
clarified that merit and excellence assume special significance in the context of
professional studies. Though merit and excellence are not anathema to
non-professional education, yet at that level and due to the nature of education which
is more general, the need for merit and excellence therein is not of the degree as is
called for in the context of professional education.
105. Dealing with unaided minority educational institutions, Pai Foundation8 holds
that Article 30 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others does not come in the way of the State stepping in for the
purpose of securing transparency and recognition of merit in the matter of
admissions. Regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards and
maintaining excellence thereof are no anathema to the protection conferred by
Article 30(1). However, a distinction is to be drawn between unaided minority
educational institution of the level of schools and undergraduate colleges on the one
side and institutions of higher education, in particular, those imparting professional
education, on the other side. In the former, the scope for merit-based selection is
practically nil and hence may not call for regulation.
But in the case of the latter, transparency and merit have to be unavoidably taken care of and cannot
be compromised. There could be regulatory measures for ensuring educational standards and
maintaining excellence thereof. (See para 161, answer to Question 4, in Pai Foundation.) The source
of this distinction between two types of educational institutions referred to hereinabove is to be
found in the principle that right to administer does not include a right to maladminister.
106. S.B. Sinha, J. has, in his separate opinion in Islamic Academy described (in para 199) the
situation as a pyramid-like situation and suggested the right of minority to be read along with the
fundamental duty. Higher the level of education, lesser are the seats and higher weighs the
consideration for merit. It will, necessarily, call for more State intervention and lesser say for the
minority.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
67

107 Educational institutions imparting higher education i.e. graduate level and above and in
particular specialised education such as technical or professional, constitute a separate class. While
embarking upon resolving issues of constitutional significance, where the letter of the Constitution
is not clear, we have to keep in view the spirit of the Constitution, as spelt out by its entire scheme.
Education aimed at imparting professional or technical qualifications stands on a different footing
from other educational instruction. Apart from other SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others provisions, Article 19(6) is a clear indicator and so are
clauses (h) and (j) of Article 51-A. Education up to the undergraduate level aims at imparting
knowledge just to enrich the mind and shape the personality of a student. Graduate-level study is a
doorway to admissions in educational institutions imparting professional or technical or other
higher education and, therefore, at that level, the considerations akin to those relevant for
professional or technical educational institutions step in and become relevant. This is in the national
interest and strengthening the national wealth, education included. Education up to the
undergraduate level on the one hand and education at the graduate and postgraduate levels and in
professional and technical institutions on the other are to be treated on different levels inviting not
identical considerations, is a proposition not open to any more debate after Pai Foundation. A
number of legislations occupying the field of education whose constitutional validity has been tested
and accepted suggest that while recognition or affiliation may not be a must for education up to
undergraduate level or, even if required, may be granted as a matter of routine, recognition or
affiliation is a must and subject to rigorous scrutiny when it comes to educational institutions
awarding degrees, graduate or postgraduate, postgraduate diplomas and degrees in technical or
professional disciplines. Some such legislations are found referred in paras 81 and 82 of S.B. Sinha,
J.’s opinion in Islamic Academy.”
34. In Kanya Junior High School, Bal Vidya Mandir, Etah, U.P. v.
U.P. Basic Shiksha Parishad, Allahabd, U.P. and others29 one of the issues that arose was whether
the school established and administered by individuals professing – Jain Religion could be said to
be a Religious Minority Educational Institution in the State of U.P. It was concluded by 29 (2006) 11
SCC 92 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
this Court that since the school was recognised as a Minority Educational Institution by the Division
Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, it could not be denied that status and as such
before terminating the services of a teacher, prior approval of the District Basic Education Officer
was not necessary.
35. In Secretary, Malankara Syrian Catholic College v. T. Jose and others6 the principal question
that arose for consideration was whether right to choose a Principal is part of the right of a minority
institution under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. This Court considered the relevant decisions on
the point and also quoted para No.16 of the decision of this Court in Frank Anthony Public School
case17. The general principles relevant to establishment and administration of educational
institutions by minorities were summed up as under:-
“19. The general principles relating to establishment and administration of
educational institution by minorities may be summarised thus:
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
68

(i) The right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice comprises the following rights:
(a) to choose its governing body in whom the founders of the institution have faith
and confidence to conduct and manage the affairs of the institution;
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
(b) to appoint teaching staff (teachers/lecturers and Headmasters/Principals) as also non-teaching
staff, and to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any of its employees;
(c) to admit eligible students of their choice and to set up a reasonable fee structure;
(d) to use its properties and assets for the benefit of the institution.
(ii) The right conferred on minorities under Article 30 is only to ensure equality with the majority
and not intended to place the minorities in a more advantageous position vis-à-vis the majority.
There is no reverse discrimination in favour of minorities. The general laws of the land relating to
national interest, national security, social welfare, public order, morality, health, sanitation,
taxation, etc. applicable to all, will equally apply to minority institutions also.
(iii) The right to establish and administer educational institutions is not absolute. Nor does it
include the right to maladminister. There can be regulatory measures for ensuring educational
character and standards and maintaining academic excellence. There can be checks on
administration as are necessary to ensure that the administration is efficient and sound, so as to
serve the academic needs of the institution. Regulations made by the State concerning generally the
welfare of students and teachers, regulations laying down eligibility criteria and qualifications for
appointment, as also conditions of service of employees (both teaching and non-teaching),
regulations to prevent exploitation or oppression of employees, and regulations prescribing syllabus
and curriculum of study fall under this category. Such regulations do not in any manner interfere
with the right under Article 30(1).
(iv) Subject to the eligibility conditions/qualifications prescribed by the State being met, the
unaided minority educational institutions will have the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others freedom to appoint teachers/lecturers by adopting
any rational procedure of selection.
(v) Extension of aid by the State does not alter the nature and character of the minority educational
institution. Conditions can be imposed by the State to ensure proper utilisation of the aid, without
however diluting or abridging the right under Article 30(1).
… … …
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
69

21. We may also recapitulate the extent of regulation by the State, permissible in respect of
employees of minority educational institutions receiving aid from the State, as clarified and
crystallised in T.M.A. Pai The State can prescribe:
(i) the minimum qualifications, experience and other criteria bearing on merit, for
making appointments,
(ii) the service conditions of employees without interfering with the overall
administrative control by the management over the staff,
(iii) a mechanism for redressal of the grievances of the employees,
(iv) the conditions for the proper utilisation of the aid by the educational institutions,
without abridging or diluting the right to establish and administer educational
institutions.
In other words, all laws made by the State to regulate the administration of educational institutions
and grant of aid will apply to minority educational institutions also. But if any such regulations
interfere with the overall administrative control by the management over the staff, or
abridges/dilutes, in any other manner, the right to establish and administer educational institutions,
such regulations, to that extent, will be inapplicable to minority institutions.” SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others 35.1 As regards freedom to
choose the principal, it was observed:-
22. The Principal or Headmaster of an educational institution is responsible for the
functional efficiency of the institution, as also the quality of education and discipline
in the institution. He is also responsible for maintaining the philosophy and objects
of the institution.
35.2 It also relied upon the passage from the decision of this Court in N. Ammad23,
as under:-
25. In N. Ammad the appellant contended that he being the seniormost graduate
teacher of an aided minority school, he should be appointed as the Headmaster and
none else. He relied on Rule 44-A of the Kerala Education Rules which provided that
appointment of Headmaster shall ordinarily be according to seniority from the
seniority list prepared and maintained under clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 34.
This Court held: (SCC p. 680, paras 18-19) “18. Selection and appointment of Headmaster in a
school (or Principal of a college) are of prime importance in administration of that educational
institution. The Headmaster is the key post in the running of the school. He is the hub on which all
the spokes of the school are set around whom they rotate to generate result. A school is personified
through its Headmaster and he is the focal point on which outsiders look at the school. A bad
Headmaster can spoil the entire institution, an efficient and honest Headmaster can improve it by
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
70

leaps and bounds. The functional efficacy of a school very much depends upon the efficiency and
dedication of its Headmaster. This pristine precept remains unchanged despite many changes
taking place in the structural patterns of education over the years.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
19. How important is the post of Headmaster of a school has been pithily stated by a Full Bench of
the Kerala High Court in Aldo Maria Patroni v. E.C. Kesavan30. Chief Justice M.S. Menon has, in a
style which is inimitable, stated thus:
‘The post of the headmaster is of pivotal importance in the life of a school.
Around him wheels the tone and temper of the institution; on him depends the
continuity of its traditions, the maintenance of discipline and the efficiency of its
teaching. The right to choose the headmaster is perhaps the most important facet of
the right to administer a school, and we must hold that the imposition of any
trammel thereon—except to the extent of prescribing the requisite qualifications and
experience—cannot but be considered as a violation of the right guaranteed by Article
30(1) of the Constitution. To hold otherwise will be to make the right “a teasing
illusion, a promise of unreality”.’ Thereafter, this Court concluded that the
management of minority institution is free to find out a qualified person either from
the staff of the same institution or from outside, to fill up the vacancy; and that the
management’s right to choose a qualified person as the Headmaster of the school is
well insulated by the protective cover of Article 30(1) of the Constitution and it
cannot be chiselled out through any legislative act or executive rule except for fixing
up the qualifications and conditions of service for the post; and that any such
statutory or executive fiat would be violative of the fundamental right enshrined in
Article 30(1) and would therefore be void. This Court further observed that if the
management of the school is not 30 AIR 1965 Ker 75 : 1964 KLT 791 (FB) SK. MD.
Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
given the wide freedom to choose the person for holding the key post of Principal
subject, of course, to the restriction regarding qualifications to be prescribed by the
State, the right to administer the school would get much diminished.
35.3 It was, thereafter, concluded:-
“27. It is thus clear that the freedom to choose the person to be appointed as Principal
has always been recognised as a vital facet of the right to administer the educational
institution. This has not been, in any way, diluted or altered by T.M.A. Pai. Having
regard to the key role played by the Principal in the management and administration
of the educational institution, there can be no doubt that the right to choose the
Principal is an important part of the right of administration and even if the
institution is aided, there can be no interference with the said right. The fact that the
post of the Principal/Headmaster is also covered by State aid will make no
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
71

difference.”
36. In Sindhi Education Society and another v. Chief Secretary, Government of NCT
of Delhi and others 7 a Bench of two Judges of this Court considered inter alia
whether under Rule 64(1)(b) of the Delhi School Education Rules, 1973, instructions
could be issued to fill in the posts of teachers in an aided Minority Educational
Institution in accordance with the policy of reservation by candidates from the
categories of Scheduled Casts and Scheduled Tribes. The ratio of the cases decided by
this Court in Re: The Kerala Education Bill, 1957 9 and in Ahmedabad St. Xaviers’
College5 was considered as under:
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others “46. In the said case, the Court held that right of the minorities to some extent
was restricted in the sense that general control still could be exercised by the
authorities concerned, but in accordance with law. That is how Clause 11 of the Bill,
which has been very heavily relied upon by the respondents before us, completely
puts an embargo on the appointment of teachers of their choice and the teachers
could only be appointed out of the panel selected by the Public Service Commission.
This clause was held not to be in violation of the Constitution, but Clauses 14 and 15,
which related to taking over of the management of an aided school for the conditions
stipulated therein, were held to be unconstitutional and bad. This was in view of the
law stated under the Bill and its scheme that weighed with the Court to record the
findings aforenoticed.
47. Still another seven-Judge Bench of this Court, in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College
Society5 was primarily concerned with the scope of Articles 29 and 30 of the
Constitution, relating to the rights of minorities to impart general education and
applicability of the concept of affiliation to such institutions. Of course, the Court
held that there was no fundamental right of a minority institution to get affiliation
from a university. When a minority institution applies to a university to be affiliated,
it expresses its choice to participate in the system of general education and courses of
instructions prescribed by that university, and it agrees to follow the uniform courses
of study. Therefore, measures which will regulate the courses of study, the
qualifications and appointment of teachers, the conditions of employment of
teachers, the health, hygiene of students and the other facilities are germane to
affiliation of minority institutions.
36.1 In the context of the decision in TMA Pai Foundation8, it was observed:
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others “55. The respondents have placed reliance upon the law stated by the Bench
that any regulation framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to all
educational institutions, whether run by majority or the minority. Such a limitation
must be read into Article 30. The rule under Article 30(1) cannot be such as to
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
72

override the national interest or to prevent the Government from framing regulations
in that behalf. It is, of course, true that government regulations cannot destroy the
minority character of the institution or make a right to establish and administer a
mere illusion; but the right under Article 30 is not so absolute as to be above the law.
56. The appellant also seeks to derive benefit from the view that the courts have also
held that the right to administer is not absolute and is subject to reasonable
regulations for the benefit of the institutions as the vehicle of education consistent
with the national interest. Such general laws of the land would also be applicable to
the minority institutions as well. There is no reason why regulations or conditions
concerning generally the welfare of the students and teachers should not be made
applicable in order to provide a proper academic atmosphere. As such, the provisions
do not, in any way, interfere with the right of administration or management under
Article 30(1).
Any law, rule or regulation, that would put the educational institutions run by the minorities at a
disadvantage, when compared to the institutions run by the others, will have to be struck down. At
the same time, there may not be any reverse discrimination.
91. In T.M.A. Pai case8 the right to establish an institution is provided. The Court held that the right
to establish an institution is provided in Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Such right, however, is
subject to reasonable restriction, which may be brought about in terms of clause (6) thereof.
Further, that minority, whether based on religion or language, however, has a fundamental right to
establish and administer educational institution of its own choice under Article 30(1).
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
92. The right under clause (1) of Article 30 is not absolute but subject to reasonable restrictions
which, inter alia, may be framed having regard to the public interest and national interest of the
country. Regulation can also be framed to prevent maladministration as well as for laying down
standards of education, teaching, maintenance of discipline, public order, health, morality, etc. It is
also well settled that a minority institution does not cease to be so, the moment grant-in-aid is
received by the institution. An aided minority educational institution, therefore, would be entitled to
have the right of admission of students belonging to the minority group and, at the same time,
would be required to admit a reasonable extent of non-minority students, to the extent, that the
right in Article 30(1) is not substantially impaired and further, the citizen’s right under Article 29(2)
is not infringed.” 36.2 While considering the amplitude of the Rule in question, it was observed:
“101. To appoint a teacher is part of the regular administration and management of
the school. Of course, what should be the qualification or eligibility criteria for a
teacher to be appointed can be defined and, in fact, has been defined by the
Government of NCT of Delhi and within those specified parameters, the right of a
linguistic minority institution to appoint a teacher cannot be interfered with. The
paramount feature of the above laws was to bring efficiency and excellence in the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
73

field of school education and, therefore, it is expected of the minority institutions to
select the best teacher to the faculty. To provide and enforce any regulation, which
will practically defeat this purpose would have to be avoided. A linguistic minority is
entitled to conserve its language and culture by a constitutional mandate. Thus, it
must select people who satisfy the prescribed criteria, SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others qualification and
eligibility and at the same time ensure better cultural and linguistic compatibility to
the minority institution.
112. Every linguistic minority may have its own social, economic and cultural
limitations. It has a constitutional right to conserve such culture and language. Thus,
it would have a right to choose teachers, who possess the eligibility and qualifications,
as provided, without really being impressed by the fact of their religion and
community.
Its own limitations may not permit, for cultural, economic or other good reasons, to induct teachers
from a particular class or community. The direction, as contemplated under Rule 64(1)(b), could be
enforced against the general or majority category of the government-aided schools but, it may not be
appropriate to enforce such condition against linguistic minority schools. This may amount to
interference with their right of choice and, at the same time, may dilute their character of linguistic
minority. It would be impermissible in law to bring such actions under the cover of equality which in
fact, would diminish the very essence of their character or status. Linguistic and cultural
compatibility can be legitimately claimed as one of the desirable features of a linguistic minority in
relation to selection of eligible and qualified teachers.” 36.3 It was also observed that despite Rule
64(1)(b), a circular was issued on 21.03.1986 exempting Minority Institutions from complying with
the requirements of said Rule; and that the subsequent insistence through circular of September
1989 did not disclose any reason for such departure and it was, therefore, observed:
“117. Thus, the framework of reservation policy should be such, as to fit in within the
constitutional scheme of our democracy. As and when the SK. MD. Rafique vs.
Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Government
changes its policy decision, it is expected to give valid reasons and act in the larger
interest of the entire community rather than a section thereof. In its wisdom and
apparently in accordance with law the Government had taken a policy decision and
issued the Circular dated 21-3-1986 exempting the minority institutions from
complying with the requirements of Rule 64(1)(b) of the DSE Rules. Despite this and
the judgment of the High Court there was a change of mind by the State that resulted
in issuance of the subsequent Circular of September 1989. From the record before us,
no reasons have been recorded in support of the decision superseding the Circular
dated 21-3-1986.” 36.4 In the aforesaid circumstances, the appeal was allowed and it
was held that Rule 64(1)(b) and the circular of 1989 would not be enforceable against
Linguistic Minority Schools in the NCT of Delhi.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
74

37. In Chandana Das (Malakar) vs. State of West Bengal and others31 the question
that arose was set out in para 6 as under:-
6. … …whether the Institution’s right to select and appoint teachers is in any way
affected by the provisions of the Rules of Management of Recognised
Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 framed under the
provisions of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963?” In terms of
Rule 28 teachers on permanent or temporary basis, against permanent or temporary
vacancies, could be appointed only on the recommendation of the West Bengal
Regional School Service 31 (2015) 12 SCC 140 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Commission32. However,
according to Rule 33, on the application by any institution to which the provisions of
Articles 26 and 30 of the Constitution apply, rules could be framed by the State
Government. According to the State, the concerned institution had never claimed
minority status and was never recognised as minority institution. Reliance was also
placed on Rule 8(3) of the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Government
Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969 whereunder permission for special
constitution was granted to the institution and, therefore, it was submitted that
having accepted the special constitution, it could not turn around and contend that it
was a minority institution as per special rules framed in terms of Rule 33.
37.1 There was disagreement between the Judges constituting the Bench.
According to Thakur, J, as the learned Chief Justice then was, since the institution was set up by
Punjabi speaking Sikh community, a linguistic minority in the State, the mechanism provided for
making appointments under Rule 28 had no application to minority educational institutions for
whom there could be special dispensation under Rule 33. During the course of his Judgment,
Thakur, J. observed:-
“21. It is unnecessary to multiply decisions on the subject for the legal position is well
settled. Linguistic 32 Constituted in forms of 1997 Act – as dealt with in para 6
hereinabove.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
institution and religious are entitled to establish and administer their institutions. Such right of
administration includes the right of appointing teachers of its choice but does not denude the State
of its power to frame regulations that may prescribe the conditions of eligibility for appointment of
such teachers. The regulations can also prescribe measures to ensure that the institution is run
efficiently for the right to administer does not include the right to maladministration. While
grant-in-aid is not included in the guarantee contained in the Constitution to linguistic and religious
minorities for establishing and running their educational institutions, such grant cannot be denied
to such institutions only because the institutions are established by linguistic or religious minority.
Grant of aid cannot, however, be made subservient to conditions which deprive the institution of
their substantive right of administering such institutions. Suffice it to say that once Respondent 4
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
75

Institution is held to be a minority institution entitled to the protection of Articles 26 and 30 of the
Constitution of India the right to appoint teachers of its choice who satisfy the conditions of
eligibility prescribed for such appointments under the relevant rules is implicit in their rights to
administer such institutions. Such rights cannot then be diluted by the State or its functionaries
insisting that the appointment should be made only with the approval of the Director or by following
the mechanism generally prescribed for institutions that do not enjoy the minority status.”
(Emphasis supplied) 37.2 Banumathi, J., however, found that the concerned institution had never
claimed to be a minority institution and had, in fact, accepted the special constitution in terms of
Rule 8 (3). It was, therefore, observed:-
“52. The fourth respondent school has accepted the special constitution and it has not
chosen to challenge the same. As rightly held by the High Court, when the fourth
respondent school has accepted the special SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others constitution and has not
claimed to be a minority institution, the appellants who are merely employees of such
an institution, cannot contend that the institution was a minority institution entitled
to appoint its own teachers.” 37.3 Because of the disagreement, the matter was
directed to be placed before a Bench of three Judges of this Court, which has since
then rendered its decision on 25.09.201933. It was noted that Rule 32 specifically
declared that nothing in the concerned Rules would apply to an educational
institution established and administered by a minority referred to in clause
(c) of Section 2 of the West Bengal Minorities’ Commission Act, 1996, which had, in
turn, defined expression “minority” to mean a community based on religion such as
Muslim, Christian, Sikh, Buddhist, or Zorastrian (Parsee). As regards the first
question, it was, therefore, observed in paragraphs 17 to 20 that the Institution was a
minority educational institution. It was also considered whether declaration as to
status of the minority institution by the competent authority was necessary before the
institution could claim the status of being a minority institution. Both the issues
which had led to disagreement between two Judges were thus, squarely answered
and the decision of Thakur, J. was accepted to be the correct view on both counts.
33Reported in 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1253 [Chandana Das (Malakar) vs. State of West Bengal and
others] SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
37.4 During the course of its discussion, this Court also considered the decision in Ahmedabad St.
Xavier’s College5 case and observed:-
“30. A reading of the aforesaid judgment would leave no manner of doubt that if
Respondent No. 4 is a minority institution, Rule 28 of the Rules for Management of
Recognized Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969, cannot
possibly apply as there would be a serious infraction of the right of Respondent No. 4
to administer the institution with teachers of its choice.” DISCUSSION AND
CONCLUSION
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
76

38. In the backdrop of the decisions of this Court referred to hereinabove, we must now consider
whether the relevant provisions of the Commission Act transgress upon the rights of a minority
institution or said provisions can be termed as “tenable as ensuring the excellence of the institution
without injuring the essence of the right” 34 of a minority institution. Right from Re: The Kerala
Education Bill9 Case the issue that has engaged the attention of this Court is about the content of
rights of minority educational institution and the extent and width of applicability of regulations
and what can be said to be permissible regulations. If the cases in the first segment i.e. upto the
decision in TMA Pai Foundation8 are considered, the following principles emerge:-
34 Expression used by Krishna Iyer J. in the Gandhi Faiz – e-am College case13 SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
A) In Re: The Kerala Education Bill9 Case, Clause 11(2) in terms of which the State
Public Services Commission was empowered to select candidates for appointment as
teachers in Government and aided schools, was found to be a permissible regulation.
It was observed that such provision, inter alia, was applicable to all educational
institutions and was designed to give protection and security to the teachers engaged
in rendering service to the nation.
B) The decision in Sidhajbhai Sabhai10, however, observed, “Unlike Art. 19, the fundamental
freedom under clause (1) of Art. 30, is absolute in terms; it is not made subject to any reasonable
restrictions of the nature the fundamental freedoms enunciated in Art. 19 may be subjected to.” It
went on to add “Regulation made in the true interests of efficiency of instruction, discipline, health,
sanitation, morality, public order and the like may undoubtedly be imposed.” It read the decision in
Re: The Kerala Education Bill9 case as “not an authority for the proposition submitted by the
Additional Solicitor General that all regulative measures which are not destructive or annihilative of
the character of the institution established by the minority, provided the regulations are in the
national or public interest, are valid.” It however laid down a test - “Such regulation must satisfy a
dual test - the test of reasonableness, and the test that it is regulative of the educational character of
the institution and is conducive to making the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others institution an effective vehicle of education for the minority
community or other persons who resort to it.” C) (i) In Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 case, while
considering the importance of teachers in an educational institution, Ray C.J. in his leading
judgment observed, “The minority institutions have the right to administer institutions. This right
implies the obligation and duty of the minority institutions to render the very best to the students.
In the right of administration, checks and balances in the shape of regulatory measures are required
to ensure the appointment of good teachers and their conditions of service.” It was further stated
that “regulations which will serve the interests of the teachers are of paramount importance in good
administration.”
(ii) According to Khanna, J., “The regulations have necessarily to be made in the interest of the
institution as a minority educational institution. They have to be so designed as to make it an
effective vehicle for imparting education.”; and “Regulations made in the true interests of efficiency
of instruction, discipline, health, sanitation, morality, public order and the like may undoubtedly be
imposed.” A word of caution was also expressed while observing, “The minority institutions cannot
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
77

be allowed to fall below the standards of excellence expected of educational institutions, or under
the guise of exclusive right of management, to decline SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee,
contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others to follow the general pattern. While the management
must be left to them, they may be compelled to keep in step with others.” Khanna, J. then laid down
“Balance has, therefore, to be kept between the two objectives, that of ensuring the standard of
excellence of the institution and that of preserving the right of the minorities to establish and
administer their educational institutions. Regulations which embrace and reconcile the two
objectives can be considered to be reasonable.”;
(iii) Mathew, J. however stated, “The question whether a regulation is in the general interest of the
public has no relevance, if it does not advance the excellence of the institution as a vehicle for
general secular education as, exhypothesi, the only permissible regulations are those which secure
the effectiveness of the purpose of the facility, namely, the excellence of the educational institutions
in respect of their educational standards. This is the reason why this Court has time and again said
that the question whether a particular regulation is calculated to advance the general public interest
is of no consequence if it is not conducive to the interests of the minority community and those
persons who resort to it.” D) In Gandhi Faiz-e-am College13, Krishna Iyer, J. found “In our case
autonomy is virtually left intact and refurbishing, not restructuring, is prescribed. The core of the
right is not gouged out at all and the regulation SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others is at once reasonable and calculated to promote excellence
of the institution — a text book instance of constitutional conditions.” The regulation was, however,
not found to be permissible by Mathew, J.
E) In Frank Anthony Public School17 case, it was emphasized, “The excellence of the instruction
provided by an institution would depend directly on the excellence of the teaching staff, and in turn,
that would depend on the quality and the contentment of the teachers.”
39. We now turn to TMA Pai Foundation8 case and consider the principles that it laid down and
whether there was reiteration of the principles laid down in the decisions of this Court in the earlier
segment or whether there was any change or shift in the emphasis.
A) In para 50, five incidents were stated to comprise the “right to establish and administer” and
three of them were stated to be :-
(a) right to admit students;
(b) right to appoint staff – teaching and non-teaching; and
(c) right to take disciplinary action against the staff.
The discussion in the leading judgment was under various headings and the important one being “5.
To what extent can the rights of aided private minority institutions to administer be regulated?” SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others B) The earlier
decisions of the Court were considered and while considering the judgment of this Court in
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
78

Sidhajbhai Sabhai10 case it was observed:-
“If this is so, it is difficult to appreciate how the Government can be prevented from
framing regulations that are in the national interest, as it seems to be indicated in the
passage quoted hereinabove. Any regulation framed in the national interest must
necessarily apply to all educational institutions, whether run by the majority or the
minority. Such a limitation must necessarily be read into Article 30. The right under
Article 30(1) cannot be such as to override the national interest or to prevent the
Government from framing regulations in that behalf. It is, of course, true that
government regulations cannot destroy the minority character of the institution or
make the right to establish and administer a mere illusion; but the right under Article
30 is not so absolute as to be above the law.” C) Thus, the principle laid down in
Sidhajbhai Sabhai10 that the right under Article 30(1) cannot be whittled down by
so-called regulative measures conceived in the interest not of the minority
educational institution, but of the public or the nation as a whole was not accepted in
TMA Pai Foundation8. The emphasis was clear that any regulation framed in the
national interest must necessarily apply to all educational institutions, whether run
by the majority or the minority and put the matter beyond any doubt. A caveat was
however entered and it was stated that the SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Government regulations
cannot destroy the minority character of the institution.
D) The leading judgment then observed that the correct approach would be - what was laid down by
Khanna, J. in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 case:-
“A balance has to be kept between the two objectives — that of ensuring the standard
of excellence of the institution, and that of preserving the right of the minorities to
establish and administer their educational institutions. Regulations that embraced
and reconciled the two objectives could be considered to be reasonable. This, in our
view, is the correct approach to the problem.” E) The majority judgment then
summed up the matter and stated:-
“It is difficult to comprehend that the framers of the Constitution would have given
such an absolute right to the religious or linguistic minorities, which would enable
them to establish and administer educational institutions in a manner so as to be in
conflict with the other Parts of the Constitution. ……..
137. …… The right under Article 30(1) has, therefore, not been held to be absolute or
above other provisions of the law, and we reiterate the same. By the same analogy,
there is no reason why regulations or conditions concerning, generally, the welfare of
students and teachers should not be made applicable in order to provide a proper
academic atmosphere, as such provisions do not in any way interfere with the right of
administration or management under Article 30(1).” It was further laid down :-
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
79

SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others “In other words, the essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment
between the majority and the minority institutions. ….. Laws of the land, including
rules and regulations, must apply equally to the majority institutions as well as to the
minority institutions.”
40. The decision in TMA Pai Foundation8, rendered by Eleven Judges of this Court, thus put the
matter beyond any doubt and clarified that the right under Article 30(1) is not absolute or above the
law and that conditions concerning the welfare of the students and teachers must apply in order to
provide proper academic atmosphere, so long as the conditions did not interfere with the right of the
administration or management. What was accepted as correct approach was the test laid down by
Khanna, J. in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 case that a balance be kept between two objectives -
one to ensure the standard of excellence of the institution and the other preserving the right of the
minorities to establish and administer their educational institutions. The essence of Article 30(1)
was also stated – “to ensure equal treatment between the majority and the minority institutions”
and that rules and regulations would apply equally to the majority institutions as well as to the
minority institutions.
41. The decisions of this Court rendered after TMA Pai Foundation8 case, may now be considered.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others A) In
Brahmo Samaj Education Society24, the argument that the appointment of teachers through College
Service Commission would maintain equal standard of education for all throughout the State was
not accepted and it was observed that the equal standards would be maintained by insistence on
qualifying tests or examinations. This Court, however, did not consider whether the Rules in
question were valid or not and left it to the authorities to bring the rules and regulations in
conformity with the principles laid down in TMA Pai Foundation8. It may be stated here that a
review petition has since then been allowed and the matter now stands referred to a Constitution
Bench.35 B) The decision of this Court in P.A. Inamdar25 was not directly concerned with the rights
of the minority educational institutions receiving aid. It, however, dealt with the matter regarding
admission of students in unaided professional educational institutions and observed that the
admission of students in minority unaided professional educational institutions must also be
governed on the basis of merit. It thus did not accept the right to admit students to be an unqualified
right inhering in a minority professional educational institution. The discussion in that case shows
that the admissions based on merit in professional educational 35 As observed in para 41 of
Chandana Das – (2019) SCC Online SC 1253 SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others institutions were found to be in the national interest and
strengthening the national welfare.
(C) Malankara Syrian Catholic College6 was concerned with selection and appointment of a
Principal in an unaided minority educational institution. It was stated in para 19 that the right
conferred on minorities under Article 30 was only to ensure equality with majority and was not
intended to place the minorities in a more advantageous position vis-à-vis the majority and that
there was no reverse discrimination in favour of minorities and that the general laws of the land
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
80

relating to national interest, would equally apply to minority institutions. It was also observed that
the Principal or Headmaster of any educational institution would be responsible for functional
efficiency of the institution and also for the quality of education and discipline in the educational
institutions as well as maintaining the philosophy and objects of the institution. On that premise,
the right to choose a Principal was accepted to be part of the right of a minority educational
institution. It also relied upon the decision in N. Ammad23 case which in turn had relied upon the
Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court. It was, therefore, stated that the power to choose a
Headmaster was always recognised as an important facet of the right to the administer the
educational institutions.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others (D)
Sindhi Education Society7 was concerned with the issue whether instructions could be issued to fill
up the posts of teachers in an unaided minority institution in accordance with the principles and
policy of reservation. The concerned rules empowered the authority to issue such instructions.
However, a Circular was issued on 21.03.1986 exempting minority institutions from complying with
the said Rule. The subsequent insistence through Circular of September, 1989, which did not
disclose any reason for departure was not held to be enforceable. The discussion in the case
undoubtedly deals with the issue whether the minority educational institutions have a right to
choose persons to be appointed as teachers and could there be any regulations and could that right
be in any way affected by regulations. However, in the context of a Linguistic Minority Schools it was
observed that such institutions must have a right to select the best teachers who not only satisfy the
prescribed criteria, qualification and eligibility but also ensure better cultural and linguistic
compatibility.
Since, the candidates nominated in terms of powers conferred by Rule 64(1)(b) and the instructions
issued in Circular of September, 1989 would not satisfy such requirements and ensure compatibility,
the appeal was allowed.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others (E) In
Chandana Das31, the principal issue was whether the concerned institution was a minority
institution or not. On that issue, there was a disagreement between two Judges of this Court and the
matter was referred to a Bench of three Judges which accepted the view of Thakur, J. and held that
the institution was a minority educational institution 33. The issue arose in the context whether
recommendations of the West Bengal School Service Commission as regards appointments of
teachers against permanent or temporary vacancies could be validly issued in so far as a minority
educational institution was concerned. It may be stated that in terms of Section 15 of 1997 Act,
nothing in that Act would apply to “a School established and administered by a minority whether
based on religion or language” and as such the recommendations of the West Bengal School Service
Commission could never apply to a minority institutions.
Once the view taken by Thakur, J. was accepted and it was held that the institution was a minority
institution, by virtue of said Section 15, the West Bengal School Commission could not be competent
to issue any direction.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
81

45. Thus, going by the decision of eleven Judges of this Court in TMA Pai Foundation8, so long as
the principles laid down therein (as culled out in para 40 hereinabove) are satisfied, it is permissible
if any regulations seek to ensure the standard of excellence of the institutions while SK. MD. Rafique
vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others preserving the right of the
minorities to establish and administer their educational institutions.
Out of five incidents which constitute “the right to establish and administer” an educational
institution as noted in para 50 of the leading judgment in TMA Pai Foundation8, the right to admit
students has not been considered to be an absolute and an unqualified right. The decision in P.A.
Inamdar25 shows that in professional educational institutions or those imparting higher education,
merit based selection has been taken to be in the interest of the nation and subserving and
strengthening the national welfare. Selection of meritorious students has been accepted to be in the
national interest. A minority institution cannot in the name of right under Article 30(1) of the
Constitution, disregard merit or merit-based selection of students as regards professional and
higher education. The right to take disciplinary action against the staff has also not been accepted to
be an unqualified right. TMA Pai Foundation8 itself lays down that even in an unaided minority
educational institution, a mechanism must be evolved and appropriate Tribunal must be constituted
to consider the grievances and till then the Tribunals could be presided over by a judicial officer of
the rank of a District Judge. To that extent, there was a definite departure from the law laid down in
Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 case which SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Rahamania High Madrasah and Others had struck down Sections 51-A and 52-A of the Gujrat
University Act, 1949.
46. When it comes to the right to appoint teachers, in terms of law laid down in TMA Pai
Foundation8 a regulation framed in the national interest must necessarily apply to all institutions
regardless whether they are run by majority or minority as the essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure
equal treatment between the majority and minority institutions. An objection can certainly be raised
if an unfavourable treatment is meted out to an educational institution established and
administered by minority. But if ensuring of excellence in educational institutions is the underlying
principle behind a regulatory regime and the mechanism of selection of teachers is so designed to
achieve excellence in institutions, the matter may stand on a completely different footing.
47. The test accepted in TMA Pai Foundation8, and the balance between two objectives can well be
considered in the context of two categories of institutions; one imparting education which is directly
aimed at or dealing with preservation and protection of the heritage, culture, script and special
characteristics of a religious or a linguistic minority;
while the second category of institutions could be those which are SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others imparting what is commonly known as
secular education. When it comes to the institutions in the former category, the teachers who believe
in the religious ideology or in the special characteristics of the concerned minority would alone be
able to imbibe in the students admitted in such educational institutions, what the minorities would
like to preserve, profess and propagate. But, if the subjects in the curriculum are purely secular in
character, that, is to say, subjects like Arithmetic, Algebra, Physics, Chemistry or Geography, the
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
82

intent must be to impart education availing the best possible teachers. In the first category,
maximum latitude may be given to the managements of the concerned minority institutions as they
would normally be considered to be the best judges of what would help them in protecting and
preserving the heritage, culture, script or such special features or characteristics of the concerned
minorities. However, when it comes to the second category of institutions, the governing criteria
must be to see to it that the most conducive atmosphere is put in place where the institution
achieves excellence and imparts best possible education.
48. As laid down in the leading judgment in Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s College5 case, regulations
which will serve the interest of the students so also regulations which will serve the interest of the
teachers are of SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and
Others paramount importance in good administration; that regulations in the interest of efficiency
of teachers are necessary for preserving harmony amongst the institutions; and that the
appointment of teachers is an important part in educational institutions. It is quite natural that
qualitatively better teachers will ensure imparting of education of the highest standard and will help
in achieving excellence. As accepted in Frank Anthony Public School17 case, the excellence of the
instruction provided by an institution would depend directly on the excellence of the teaching staff
and would in turn depend inter alia on the quality of teachers.
49. Thus, if the intent is to achieve excellence in education, would it be enough if the concerned
educational institutions were to employ teachers with minimum requisite qualifications in the name
of exercise of Right under Article 30 of the Constitution, while better qualified teachers are available
to impart education in the second category of institutions as stated hereinabove. For example, if the
qualifying percentile index for a teacher to be appointed in an educational institution, considering
his educational qualifications, experience and research, is required to be 50, and if teachers
possessing qualifications far greater and higher than this basic index are available, will it be proper
exercise for a minority SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High
Madrasah and Others educational institution to select teachers with lower index disregarding those
who are better qualified? Will that subserve pursuit of excellence in education? One can understand
if under the regulatory regime candidates who are otherwise less qualified are being nominated in
the minority educational institution and the minority educational institution is forced to accept such
less meritorious candidates in preference to better qualified candidates. In such cases, the minority
educational institution can certainly be within its rights to agitate the issue and claim a right to
choose better teachers. But if the candidates who are selected and nominated under the regulatory
regime to impart education which is purely secular in character, are better qualified, would the
minority institution be within its rights to reject such nomination only in the name of exercise of a
right of choice? The choice so exercised would not be in pursuit of excellence. Can such choice then
be accepted?
If the right is taken to be absolute and unqualified, then certainly such choice must be recognised
and accepted. But, if the right has not been accepted to be absolute and unqualified and the national
interest must always permeate and apply, the excellence and merit must be the governing criteria.
Any departure from the concept of merit and excellence would not make a minority educational
institution an effective vehicle to achieve SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
83

Rahamania High Madrasah and Others what has been contemplated in various decisions of this
Court. Further, if merit is not the sole and governing criteria, the minority institutions may lag
behind the non-minority institutions rather than keep in step with them.
Going back to the example given above, as against index of 50 i.e. the minimum qualifying index, if a
candidate nominated under the regulatory regime is at an index of 85, selection by a minority
educational institution of a candidate at an index 55 may certainly be above the minimum qualifying
mark, but in preference to the one at the index of 85 who is otherwise available, the appointment of
a person at the index level of 55, will never give the requisite impetus to achieve excellence. A
meritorious candidate at the index level of 85 in the above example, if given the requisite posting
will not only help in upholding the principle of merit but will in turn generate an atmosphere of
qualitative progress and sense of achievement commensurate with societal objectives and ideology
and such posting will, therefore, be in true national interest.
50. At the cost of repetition, it needs to be clarified that if the minority institution has a better
candidate available than the one nominated under a regulatory regime, the institution would
certainly be within its rights to reject the nomination made by the authorities but if the person
nominated for imparting education is otherwise better qualified and suitable, any SK. MD. Rafique
vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others rejection of such
nomination by the minority institution would never help such institution in achieving excellence
and as such, any such rejection would not be within the true scope of the Right protected under
Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
51. With these basic principles in mind, we may now consider the statutory provisions under which
the teachers could be nominated under the Commission Act and see whether the concerned
regulations help in achieving excellence or whether those provisions are violative of the Rights of the
minority institutions.
52. In terms of Section 4 of the Commission Act, the Commission is to consist of a Chairman and
four Members. The Chairman of the Commission has to be an eminent educationist having
profound knowledge in Islamic Culture and must be well versed in education with teaching
experience inter alia as a teacher of a University or as a Principal of a college, for a period of not less
than twelve years. It is true that the latter part of Section 4(ii) speaks of an officer of the State
Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary who could also be appointed as the Chairman of
the Commission. But in our view, considering the nature of duties that the Chairman is to discharge,
even an officer of the State Government has to be a person with profound knowledge in Islamic SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others Culture. Apart
from the Chairman, there are four Members who are to be appointed in terms of Section 4(iii) of the
Commission Act. Out of these four Members, one has to be an eminent educationist having
profound knowledge in Islamic Theology and Culture, while the other two Members must have
teaching experience inter alia as a teacher of a University, or a Principal of a College for a period of
not less than ten years. The fourth member could be a non-educationist, but he must have held the
position of eminence in public life or in Legal or Administrative Service.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
84

Predominant composition of the Commission is thus of educationists and two of them have to be
persons with profound knowledge in Islamic Culture and Islamic Theology. The provisions of the
Commission Act are thus specially designed for Madrasahs and Madrasah Education System in the
State. Rule 8 of the 2010 Rules stipulates fair and transparent process of merit based selection and
the statutory mechanism would ensure that only those teachers would be selected who would be
best suited to impart education in Madrasah Education System. The State Legislature has taken care
to see that the composition of the Commission would ensure compatability of the teachers who
would be selected to impart education in Madrasah Education System, which is also emphasized in
the Statement of Objects and Reasons.
SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others
53. It is true that the recommendations or nominations of teachers made by the Commission are
otherwise binding on the Managing Committees of concerned Madrasahs, but, in terms of second
proviso to Section 10 of the Commission Act, if there be any error, it is open to the Managing
Committee of the concerned Madrasah to bring it to the notice of the Commission for removal of
such error. The concept of ‘error’ as contemplated must also include cases where the concerned
Madrasah could appoint a better qualified teacher than the one nominated by the Commission. If
any such error is pointed out, the Commission will certainly have to rectify and remove the error.
The further protection is afforded by Section 12 of the Commission Act, under which the concerned
Madrasah could be within its rights to refuse to issue appointment letter to the candidate
recommended by the Commission if any better qualified candidate is otherwise available with the
managing committee of the concerned Madrasah. Such refusal may also come within the expression
‘any reasonable ground’ as contemplated in Section 12(i) of the Act.
The legislature has thus taken due care that the interest of a minority institution will always be taken
care of by ensuring that i) in normal circumstances, the best qualified and suitable candidates will
be nominated by the Commission; ii) and in case there be any error on part of the Commission, the
concerned Managing Committee could not only point out SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing
Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others the error which would then be rectified
by the Commission but the Managing Committee may also be within its rights in terms of Section 12
(i) to refuse the nomination on a reasonable ground.
54. The regime put in place by the State legislature thus ensures that the Commission comprising of
experts in the field would screen the talent all across the State; will adopt a fair selection procedure
and select the best available talent purely on merit basis; and even while nominating, the interest of
the minority institution will also be given due weightage and taken care of. The statutory provisions
thus seek to achieve ‘excellence’ in education and also seek to promote the interest of the minority
institutions.
The provisions satisfy the test as culled out in the decision of this Court in TMA Pai Foundation8
case.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
85

55. In our considered view going by the principles laid down in the decision in TMA Pai Foundation
case8, the concerned provisions cannot, therefore, be said to be transgressing the rights of the
minority institutions.
The selection of the teachers and their nomination by the Commission constituted under the
provisions of the Commission Act would satisfy the national interest as well as the interest of the
minority educational SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah
and Others institutions and said provisions are not violative of the rights of the minority educational
institutions.
56. The aforesaid conclusions have been arrived at by us in keeping with the principles laid down by
this Court in TMA Pai Foundation8 case.
We are aware that in Brahmo Samaj Education Society24, Sindhi Education Society7 and Chandana
Das (Malakar)33, decided after TMA Pai Foundation8, this Court had also dealt with the question
whether the concerned authorities could validly nominate teachers to be appointed in minority
educational institutions. Brahmo Samaj Education Society24 did not specifically deal with the
question whether rules were valid or not and left it to the authorities to bring the rules and
regulations in conformity with the principles in TMA Pai Foundation8 case. Sindhi Education
Society7 dealt with the issue in the context of reservation. It also found that the teachers nominated
by the concerned authorities would not be compatible to teach in educational institutions run by
linguistic minorities.
In Chandana Das (Malakar)33 the basic issue was whether the concerned institution was a minority
institution or not. Sindhi Education Society7 and Chandana Das (Malakar)33 dealt with statutory
regimes which did not have any special features or matters concerning compatibility of teachers SK.
MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania High Madrasah and Others which could
be required going by the special characteristics of the minority educational institutions. However,
the additional feature in the present matter shows that the composition of the Commission with
special emphasis on persons having profound knowledge in Islamic Culture and Theology, would
ensure that the special needs and requirements of minority educational institutions will always be
taken care of and thus the present case stands on a different footing.
We, therefore, have no hesitation in going by the test culled out in the TMA Pai Foundation8 and
hold that the provisions of the Commission Act are not violative of the rights of the minority
educational institutions on any count.
57. In the premises, while allowing these appeals, we set aside the view taken by the Single Judge
and the Division Bench of the High Court and dismiss Writ Petition No.20650(W) of 2013 and other
connected matters. We also hold Sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 of the Commission Act to be valid and
constitutional.
58. In the end, we declare all nominations made by the Commission in pursuance of the provisions
of the Commission Act to be valid and SK. MD. Rafique vs. Managing Committee, contai Rahamania
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
86

High Madrasah and Others operative. However, if after the disposal of the matters by the High
Court any appointments are made by the concerned Madarshas, such appointments of teachers shall
be deemed to be valid for all purposes. But the Commission shall hereafter be competent to select
and nominate teachers to various Madarshas in accordance with the provisions of the Commission
Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
59. With the aforesaid observations these appeals are allowed. No separate orders are required to be
passed in respect of Writ Petitions and contempt petitions which stand disposed of in terms of
declaration as above. No orders as to costs.
……………………..J. [Arun Mishra] ……………………..J. [Uday Umesh Lalit] New Delhi;
January 6, 2020.
Sk. Md. Rafique vs Managing Committee, Contai Rahamania ... on 6 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118299963/
87
