Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1901, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
200, (2020) 4 SCALE 24
Author: Ajay Rastogi
Bench: Ajay Rastogi, A.M. Khanwilkar
                                                               NON−REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).1670 OF 2020
                             (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) NO(S).6201 OF 2016)
          SOUMITRA KUMAR NAHAR                                   ………APPELLANT(S)
                                   VERSUS
          PARUL NAHAR                                           …….RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).1671 OF 2020
                            (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) NO(S). 16032 OF 2016)
                                              JUDGMENT
Ajay Rastogi, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. In a custody battle, no matter which parent wins but the child is always the loser and it is the
children who pay the heaviest price as they are shattered when the Court by its judicial process tells
them to go with the parent whom he or she deems fit. It is a kind of dispute which has arisen initially
from the Family Court and reached to this Court.
3. The husband Soumitra Kumar Nahar assailed the order of the High Court of Delhi dated 4th
September, 2015 which partly allowed the appeal with the direction to the wife Parul Nahar to
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
1

comply with the consent terms qua the visitation rights of the appellant− husband Soumitra Kumar
Nahar to meet son Master Shravan. At the same time, visitation rights to meet the daughter Sanjana
were declined. It was also observed that if the daughter wishes to meet her father, she can do so at
her own desire.
4. Pending Civil Appeal @ Special Leave Petition(Civil) No. 6201 of 2016, a miscellaneous
application was filed by the respondent Parul Nahar before the High Court of Delhi of which an
order came to be passed on 12th May, 2016 directing Dr. Achal Bhagat (Psychotherapist) to
ascertain the background facts regarding the relationship of the children with their father Soumitra
Kumar Nahar and paternal grandparents before they joined the sole custody of their mother. It is
unfortunate to notice that because of a warpath of the couple, both the paternal grandparents died
during pendency of the proceedings.
5. Since the facts arise are almost common in both the appeals, we have noticed the relevant facts for
our consideration from Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 6201 of 2016.
6. Appellant Soumitra Kumar Nahar and respondent Parul Nahar married as per Hindu rites and
customs on 10 th December, 2001. They were blessed with a baby girl “Sanjana” born out of the
wedlock on 24th May, 2005 and a baby boy “Shravan” was born on 10th October, 2008. It manifests
from the record that some trivial matrimonial differences cropped up after the second child was
born in October, 2008 and it was unfortunate that the parties started making personal allegations
and counter allegations against each other, that forced the appellant−husband to file Guardianship
Petition No. 56 of 2011 on 15th April, 2011 under Sections 7,8,10 & 11 of the Guardian and Wards
Act, 1890. Simultaneously, appellant filed a separate Divorce Petition bearing HMA No. 821 of 2011
in September, 2011 on the grounds of cruelty and adultery.
7. The stage reached where the father of the appellant Soumitra Kumar Nahar filed a suit CS(OS)
No. 2795 of 2011 before the High Court of Delhi impleading the appellant and respondent as a party
praying for mandatory injunction against the respondent wife from entering into his self−acquired
property.
8. It is pertinent to mention here that appellant was residing along with his wife Parul Nahar and
parents at B−197, Greater Kailash−I, New Delhi but because of compelling reasons, the appellant−
husband and respondent−wife had to leave their matrimonial home and they shifted to the rented
accommodation at M−24, Greater Kailash−I, New Delhi.
9. The High Court of Delhi, after the matter being heard, passed an Order on 5th February, 2013
granting interim mandatory injunction in favour of the plantiff−father directing the defendant no.
1(Parul Nahar) to vacate the subject property being B−197, Greater Kailash−I, New Delhi and
handover the peaceful possession of the same to the plaintiff from the date of the order. The relevant
extract of the order is as under:− “Interim mandatory injunction is therefore granted in favour of the
petitioner and against the defendant no.1. Defendant No.1 is accordingly directed to vacate the
subject property bearing No. B− 197, Greater Kailash, Part−I, New Delhi and hand over peaceful
possession of the same to the plaintiff within a period of one month from the date of this order. It is
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
2

further directed that concerned Court seized with the petition filed by defendant No.1 under
Domestic Violence Act shall decide the interim application of defendant No.1 for the grant of
maintenance, which will include her right to a residence in the commensurate property as per the
financial status of defendant No.2, within a period of one month from the date of this order.
Defendant No.1 in the meanwhile is also set at liberty to shift to the rented accommodation as
offered by defendant No.2 for her exclusive residence along with her children or to accept an
amount of Rs.30,000 towards the amount of rent, pending disposal of her maintenance application
before the concerned Metropolitan Magistrate/ Mahila Court.”
10. The order passed by the High Court granting interim mandatory injunction dated 5th February,
2013 came to be challenged by the respondent−wife before the Division Bench in FAO(OS) No.
129/2013. After the matter being heard, a consent order came to be passed in terms of settlement
recorded under Order dated 1st March, 2013 as follows:− “It is thus read as under:−
(i) The appellant states that the accommodation occupied by respondent No.2 at present i.e. Second
Floor, M−24, Greater Kailash – I, New Delhi of two bed rooms fully furnished is acceptable to her
for the purpose of her residence and of her children. This course of action being acceptable to
respondent No.2, the appellant agrees to move into the accommodation within a period of 15 days
from today. The natural sequitor is that respondent no. 2 will move out of that accommodation
within the same period of time.
(ii) Respondent No.2 undertakes to this court to continue to pay the rent, electricity and water
charges for the aforesaid premises and ensure that accommodation is available to the appellant and
the children.
(iii) Respondent No.2 will pay appellant maintenance @ Rs.60,000/− per month inclusive of the
children and their education expenses. Such payment should be made on or before 7th day of each
month. The maintenance will commence from 1st March 2013.
(iv) The appellant and respondent No.2 also agree that the issue of visiting rights be settled. It is
thus agreed that the appellant will make available the children to respondent No.2 on every
Saturday at 10.00 AM to be brought back at 10.00 AM on the following Sunday.
(v) The appellant gives up her right and claim in the suit property in view of the settlement arrived
at.
(vi) It is further agreed that this interim arrangement qua maintenance will continue to prevail
during the pendency of the divorce proceedings.”
11. The consent order of the High Court in terms of the settlement dated 1st March, 2013 was not
complied with by the respondent− wife and she did not vacate the house of father of the appellant−
husband. The application was filed by the father of the appellant wherein the High Court directed
the appellant−husband to pay Rs. 1.5 lakhs to respondent−wife to buy household items and also
clarified that the object of the consent order is clear that is to bring to rest all other issues other than
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
3

the divorce proceedings which is to be completed within one year. Issue of maintenance, domestic
violence and the matters of custody and visiting rights stands resolved by the consent order dated 1
st March, 2013.
12. The appellant−husband thereafter filed an application before the Family Court for
implementation of the order of the High Court and in its subsequent order, the High Court observed
in its Order dated 5th April, 2013 that if there is some problem in working out of the visitation rights
in view of the stated approach of the children, directed the parties to settle the matter qua visitation
rights before the Delhi High Court Mediation Centre by taking assistance of the child psychologist.
13. When the order of the Court dated 5 th April, 2013 was not carried out by the parties, the
appellant−husband approached the Family Court seeking necessary directions of visitation rights
which came to be rejected by the Family Court vide Order dated 21 st December, 2013 that came to
be challenged before the Delhi High Court in Mat App(FC) No. 41/2014 and the High Court
disposed of the application vide Order dated 25th September, 2014, the relevant extract reads as
under:− “7. In these circumstances, we are compelled to direct as follows:− [I] The parties shall
appear before Ms. Veena Ralli/Mediator on 27th September, 2014 at 11.30 A.M. in the Delhi High
Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre to explore the possibility of negotiated settlement by
mediation. List for outcome of mediation before court on 20th November, 2014.
[II] The children of the parties shall be produced before Ms. Veena Ralli/Mediator in Samdhan, the
Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre on 18th of October, 2014 at 11.00 A.M. Ms.
Veena Ralli shall facilitate free and healthy meetings between the petitioner/father as well as
grandparents of the children keeping in view all the sensibilities and welfare of the children in mind.
The respondent shall ensure that there is no obstruction or interference in these meetings.
[III] Ms. Veena Ralli shall request any child psychologist associated with the Centre to separately
have conselling sessions with the children and/or parents as she would deem necessary on such
date[s] and times as are convenient.
[IV] An assurance is given to us by Mr. Prakash Gautam, learned counsel for the respondent, that
the orders of this court shall be complied with in letter and spirit.
[V] A direction is issued to the trial court dealing with HMA No.821/2011 to proceed with the
completion of evidence in the case at the earliest, if possible on day to day proceeding. The evidence
of the petitioner shall be completed within six months. The evidence of the respondent shall be
completed within six months thereafter.
[VI] It is made clear that the pendency of any application, including the application for
enhancement of maintenance filed by the respondent, shall not come in the way of recording of the
evidence. It is also made clear that the pendency of the mediation shall not interdict the trial of the
case.
[VII] Let the trial court record be returned forthwith.”
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
4

14. After passing of the Order dated 25 th September, 2014, the appellant−husband yet moved two
applications which are registered as CM No. 3242 of 2015 in Mat App(FC) No. 41 of 2014 and CM
No. 8858 of 2015 in Mat App(FC) No. 41 of 2014 and finally the applications were partly allowed
vide judgment dated 4 th September, 2015, the extract is as under:− “28. Thus in view of the
aforesaid discussion, the appellant partly succeeds in his appeal. We accordingly direct the
respondent to comply with the terms of the mutual settlement in so far as the visitation rights of the
father appellant herein to meet Master Shravan is concerned and in so far as granting visitation
rights to meet the daughter Sanjana is concerned, the same cannot be allowed in the light of the
aforesaid peculiar circumstances. It is, however, made clear that nothing will come in the way of the
daughter, if she wishes to meet her father at any time or even to visit him or stay with him as per her
own wish and desire.
29. We are not inclined to delve into the legalities of the case and neither do we feel the need to
discuss the judgments relied upon by both the parties as in the facts and circumstances of the
present case, a specific issue of visitation rights requires consideration, and thus we are not limiting
ourselves to legalistic aspects.”
15. The judgment of the High Court became a subject matter of challenge at the instance of the
appellant−husband in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 6201 of 2016.
16. Pending Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 6201 of 2016, in Mat App No. 65 of 2015, the
High Court of Delhi interacted with the children and took assistance of Dr. Achal Bhagat,
Psychotherapist, and thereafter passed an Order dated 12 th May, 2016 with a direction to ascertain
the background facts regarding the relationship of the children with their father Soumitra Kumar
Nahar and paternal grandparents before they joined the sole custody of their mother and observed
as follows:− “5. During the course of hearing, with the consent and on the request of the parties,
efforts had been made to explore the possibility of resolution of issues relating to visitation of the
children of the parties with the respondent−father. On the 22 nd January, 2016, in order to obtain
independent expert opinion with regard to the desirability of such interactions and meetings, we
had appointed Dr. Achal Bhagat, Psycho Therapist to make an assessment with regard to the
advisability of the compelled visitation in such adversarial atmosphere. We have received a report
from Dr. Achal Bhagat in a sealed cover. This report has made a request that the report be kept
confidential.
6. Given our above observations, it seems to us that the parties and the children need counselling.
We would therefore, request Dr. Bhagat to ascertain some background facts regarding the
relationship of the children with their father and grandparents before they joined the sole custody of
the mother. If deemed necessary and appropriate, Dr. Bhagat may utilise the services of any other
specialist(s). A report be submitted only thereafter.
7. Though at one point, we were inclined to note the report and to defer recording our observations
to the next date. However, on further consideration, this course did not seem appropriate keeping in
view the concern of this court with the welfare of the children. We have therefore, recorded what we
have observed.
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
5

8. In view of the above and in deference to the request of Dr. Achal Bhagat, we are returning the
report in a sealed cover to him with the request to conduct an assessment afresh after the interaction
with the parties and the children and submit the same to this court.
9. The respondent shall bear the expenses of the sessions with the experts.
10. The Registrar (Appellate) shall ensure that the report is returned in seal cover to Dr. Achal
Bhagat.”
17. The order passed by the High Court dated 12 th May, 2016 came to be challenged by the
respondent−wife by way of Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 16032 of 2016.
18. It reveals from the proceedings of this Court that tireless efforts were made on various sittings to
which one of us (A.M. Khanwilkar, J.) was a member, to find out an amicable solution in resolving
the inter se dispute regarding the custody of the minor children holding separate and joint session
with the parents and also with the minor children and thereafter the interim order dated 29th July,
2016 was passed by this Court is as follows:− “ The petitioner−wife in SLP (C) No.16032/2016 is
directed to produce both children in the Supreme Court Mediation Centre at 110, Lawyers'
Chambers (R.K. Jain Block), Supreme Court Compound, Tilak Marg, New Delhi−110001 at 10.30
A.M. on 30.07.2016. The Mediator, Supreme Court Mediation Centre shall see that children are in
the exclusive company of their father− Soumitra Kumar Nahar upto 4.30 P.M. The father will hand
over the custody of the children to the mother at 4.30 P.M. It is made clear that in case, any of the
children, has any function in the School, the father shall see that the child does not miss the
function.
Post for further order on 05.08.2016.”
19. Over the hearings, this Court noted the exemplary efforts of Senior Advocate, Mr. Salman
Khurshid who appeared for the respondent−wife to enable the children to spend time with their
father with a sanguine hope that when the relations will improve, visitation rights may be extended
for both the children to the father. It reveals that the efforts made by this Court could not bring any
congeniality between the spouse and the Court was constrained to pass an Order keeping in view the
paramount interest of the children to place both the children in boarding school as it was not in
their best interest to continue with either parent. The order dated 20th March, 2017 passed by this
Court is as under:− “Having regard to the strained relationship between the parties, we are of the
view that for the time being it is in the interest of the children that they be put up in a boarding
school, since, at this stage it is not in their interest to have the exclusive company of either their
father or their mother.
Learned counsel for the parties have fairly agreed on the following two schools:−
1. Welhams Boys/Girls School, Dehradun
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
6

2. Wynberg Allen School, Mussoorie We permit Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar to take the necessary
steps for admission of both the children in Welhams Boys/Girls School, Dehradun and if not
possible, in the Wynberg Allen School, Mussoorie.
We request the Management of the Schools to consider compassionately these two admissions as a
special case and.
We direct Ms. Parul Nahar, mother of the children, to cooperate with the formalities for the
admission of the children in the school. Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar, father of the children, has
graciously volunteered to bear the entire educational expenses.
Report on the steps taken by the parties shall be filed before this Court within three weeks.
Post on 18.04.2017 at 1.30 P.M., in Chambers, before the Bench comprising Kurian Joseph and A.M.
Khanwilkar, JJ.”
20. This Court had to intervene and appoint four Court Commissioners to facilitate the admission of
the children in Sherwood College, Nainital. Apart from the fact that either party when has not
complied with the orders, suo motu contempt petition was initiated against the parties and a
detailed order was passed as to how the children have to spend their Dussehra, Diwali and winter
vacations with each parent vide order dated 7th September, 2017. After interacting with the parents,
this Court, on 22 nd February, 2018, directed that the arrangements which were made vide order
dated 7th September, 2017 to continue and further vide order dated 21st August, 2018, this Court
directed the District Judge, Nainital to meet both the children at their respective colleges so as to
ascertain their wishes to come to Delhi during Rakshabandhan vacation and with whom they would
want to stay with. Upon receiving the report of the District Judge, order granting custody during the
Rakshabandhan vacation was passed on 23rd August, 2018. Orders dated 7th September, 2017 and
21st August, 2018 and 23rd August, 2018 are as follows:− Order dated 7th September, 2017 “With
reference to our order dated 25.08.2017, we are happy to note that the learned counsel on both the
sides, with due instruction from the parties, have submitted the following plan for all the three
vacations i.e. Dussehra, Diwali and Winter Vacation:− “For Dussehra Break – 28.09.2017 (Check
out 12.00 noon – 3.00 p.m.) to 03.10.2017 (Check in 10.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m.) Mr. Soumitra Kumar
Nahar can pick up Ms. Sanjana from the School on 28.09.2017 and she can remain with him till 2
p.m. on 30.09.2017. Thereafter, Mr. Nahar shall give the custody of Ms. Sanjana to Mrs. Parul
Nahar at 2 p.m. on 30.09.2017 in New Delhi. Consequently, Ms. Sanjana shall remain with Mrs.
Parul Nahar for the remainder of her Dussehra break and she would drop her back to school on
03.10.2017 by 3 p.m. For Diwali Break – 16.10.2017 (Check out 12.00 noon to 3.00 p.m.) to
23.10.2017 (Check in 10.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m.) Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar can pick up Ms. Sanjana
from the School on 16.10.2017 and she can remain with him till lunch on 19.10.2017. Post lunch on
19.10.2017, Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar shall hand over custody of Ms. Sanjana to Mrs. Parul Nahar
in New Delhi and thereafter Ms. Sanjana shall ramain with Mrs. Parul Nahar for the remainder of
her Diwali break. Mrs. Parul Nahar will drop Ms. Sanjana back to school on 23.10.2017. Winter
Vacation Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar shall pick up Ms. Sanjana from the All Saints School on
12.12.2017 and Shravan from Sherwood College on 23.11.2017 the children shall remain with him till
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
7

half of the winter vacations respectively. After half of vacation of each child he will handover the
children to Mrs. Parul Nahar in New Delhi and thereafter children shall remain with Mrs. Parul
Nahar for the remainder of her Winter vacations. Mrs. Parul Nahar shall drop both the children
back to respective schools at Nainital after completion of vacations.
Dussehra Break for Shravan Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar will pick up Shravan from Sherwood
College on 29.09.2017 and handover Shravan to Mrs. Parul Nahar on 30.09.2017 @ 2 p.m. Mrs.
Parul Nahar will drop Shravan to Sherwood School @ 5 p.m. on 30.09.2017. Subject to the approval
of Principal of Sherwood College. Diwali Break for Shravan Mr. Soumitra Kumar Nahar will pick up
Shravan from Sherwood College on 15.10.2017 and handover Shravan to Mrs. Parul Nahar on
19.10.2017 @ 2 p.m. Mrs. Parul Nahar will drop Shravan to Sherwood College @ 2.00 p.m. on
22.10.2017.” We direct the Principal of both the Schools i.e. All Saints College and Sherwood,
Nainital, to inform both the parents, in advance, the events in which the presence of the parents is
required. We also direct the Principal of both the Schools to act according to the order, as above, and
also facilitate a suitable time for both the children to meet occasionally. For further directions, post
on 26.10.2017 at 1.45 p.m. before the same Bench.” Order dated 21st August, 2018 “We direct the
District Judge, Nainital to go and meet both the children, namely, Ms. Sanjana at All Saints’ College,
Nainital and Master Shravan at Sherwood College, Nainital and ascertain whether they would like to
come to Delhi during the short vacation of Rakshabandhan and if they want to come to Delhi with
whom do they want to stay with. The District Judge, Nainital shall ascertain this information
tomorrow itself and pass on the same confidentially to Secretary General of this Court, who shall
communicate the same confidentially to this Court on 23.08.2018. List before the same Bench on
23.08.2018 at 1.40 P.M.” Order dated 23rd August, 2018 “We have the relevant inputs from the
Report of the District Judge, Nainital. We permit the father of the children to collect them from both
the schools during the Raksha Bandhan holidays and drop them back as required by the schools
concerned. There shall be no interference by the mother at the time of picking up of the children
from their respective schools or while dropping them back. If any of the children wants to visit the
mother, they are free to visit and stay also during the period of Raksha Bandhan holidays. We direct
the father to make necessary arrangements in terms of the wish expressed by any of the children,
either to visit or to stay with the mother. As far as any other issues are concerned, we make it clear
that it will be open to the parties to pursue their grievance, including the criminal complaint, in
appropriate jurisdiction. We further make it clear that in case the mother wants to talk to the
children on phone, there shall be no interference on the part of the father. It is further made clear
that this arrangement is only for the purpose of Raksha Bandhan holidays.”
21. Finally, both the children were shifted to Sherwood College, Nainital as is revealed from Order
dated 22 nd February, 2019 that the arrangement regarding custody of the minor children during
school vacations would continue in terms of earlier order until further orders.
22. Learned counsel for the appellant−husband submits that apart from the substantive Divorce
Petition HMA No. 821 of 2011 arising from the wedlock which has been filed at his instance is
pending before the competent Court of jurisdiction, no other proceedings in reference to custody of
the minor children is pending in any other Court of law at present and both the children are not in
custody of either of the parents. Although the appellant−husband make a request that, in the
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
8

present facts and circumstances, the guardianship of both the minor children be handed over to him
as they are living separately from both the parents for quite some time and if he is unable to
persuade this Court in taking the custody of the minor children, liberty may be granted to him to file
a separate guardianship petition before the competent authority and the interim arrangement made
by this Court may remain subject to the outcome of the stated petition, if any, being filed by either
party regarding custody of the minor children.
23. Learned counsel further submits that appropriate provision may be made for safety and security
of the children and he may be permitted to take all other measures which are in the interest for
upbringing of the children.
24. Learned counsel for the respondent−wife, on the other hand, has opposed the submissions made
by the appellant−husband and submits that both the paternal grandparents of the children have
recently passed away and there is no one who may have a positive influence on the children and who
may contribute and ensure their well−being and cultural growth. Further, there is no female
member in the house to look after the growing daughter at present and at least she may be
permitted by the school administration to have a glimpse of her beloved children to which she is
entitled for under the law as their mother.
25. Learned counsel further submits that the respondent−wife may be permitted to withdraw her
consent to the settlement which had been reached at one stage between the parties and recorded by
the High Court of Delhi in its Order dated 1st March, 2013.
26. At the same time, learned counsel for the respondent−wife made further submission seeking
direction to the authorities to the effect that access to the children must be provided to both the
parents as per the school rules, and either of the parent must not be arbitrarily denied access to the
children and at least her consent must also be obtained for any foreign trips or any other major
activities arranged by the school which the children may participate in for which the consent of the
parents is required. At the same time, she may also be permitted to see the report cards and other
extra− curricular accolades which due to the appellant−husband are not available to her.
27. Learned counsel has further tried to persuade this Court that the consent order passed by the
High Court of Delhi about determination of the guardianship rights by Order dated 1 st March, 2013
and all the issues settled by the consented order may be permitted to be re−agitated by the
respondent−wife including the issues pertaining to alimony, maintenance, share in ancestral
properties(movable and immovable) and right to pursue all the available civil and criminal remedies
which are available to her under the law.
28. Learned counsel further submits that contempt notices which have been issued by this Court has
caused a great loss to her. At least, that may be withdrawn and specific directions may be given to
the subordinate Courts to decide all the pending proceedings independently without being
influenced by the observations made by this Court in accordance with law.
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
9

29. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and also perused the material on record
with their assistance of which detailed reference has been made of various Orders passed by the
High Court of Delhi and also by this Court in the pending proceedings.
30. It is indisputed that the rights of the child need to be respected as he/she is entitled to the love of
both the parents. Even if there is a breakdown of marriage, it does not signify the end of parental
responsibility. It is the child who suffers the most in a matrimonial dispute.
31. It is also well settled by the catena of judgments of this Court that while deciding the matters of
custody of the child, primary and paramount consideration is always the welfare of the child. If the
welfare of the child so demands, then technical objections cannot come in the way. However, while
deciding the welfare of the child, it is not the view of one spouse alone which has to be taken into
consideration. The Courts should decide the issue of custody on a paramount consideration which is
in the best interest of the child who is the victim in the custody battle.
32. At the outset, it may be noticed that the present dispute is nowhere related to the Divorce
Petition No. HMA 821 of 2011 which has been filed at the instance of the appellant−husband
pending before the competent Court of jurisdiction and indeed may be decided without being
influenced by the observations made in the present proceedings independently in accordance with
law.
33. So far as the custody of the minor children is concerned, an endeavor was made by the High
Court in the first instance to resolve the inter se dispute between the parents keeping in view the
paramount interest of the children as they are entitled to the love and affection of both the parents
but if the parents are bent upon to lead to a separation or divorce, it is always the children who pay
the heaviest price and are the sufferers. If the parents fail to enable themselves to decide their inter
se disputes particularly in reference to custody of minor children, the Court, after due scrutiny of the
records of the case, reaches to any conclusion that always remain a guess work.
34. All the endeavours are to be made to resolve the matrimonial disputes in the first instance
through the process of mediation which is one of the effective mode of alternative mechanism in
resolving the personal disputes but if it could not make possible in resolving through the process of
mediation, further endeavor must be made by the Court through its judicial process to resolve such
personal disputes as expeditiously as possible. Delay in decision certainly cause a great loss to the
individual and deprive him/her of their rights which are protected under the Constitution and with
every passing day, the child pays heavy price of being deprived of the love and affection of their
parents for which they were never at fault but are always the loser which at no stage could be
compensated monetarily or otherwise. In the peculiar facts of the present case, the High Court of
Delhi, in the first instance, made effort after holding a separate and joint session with the parents
along with the children but nothing fruitful came forward and when the litigation came to this
Court, tireless efforts were made by this Court keeping in view the paramount interest of the
children. The orders passed by this Court to which a reference has been made in detail indicates that
it would always remain in the interest of the parties to resolve these disputes amicably sitting across
the table but unfortunately the ego of the warring parents come forward and the sufferings of the
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
10

children are shadowed over it.
35. It is an ideal situation where the grandparents remain in the company of their children and also
of their grandchildren, but very few are fortunate to have this pleasure in the fag end of their life. In
the instant case, the grandparents were not only deprived of love and affection of their children but
also of their grandchildren and because of this matrimonial tussle between the parties, they have
lost their lives. It is a message to the litigating parties to introspect and take stock of their deeds and
find out a reasonable amicable solution of the on−going matrimonial discord to secure peace and of
their better future.
36. After we have heard the parties and after going through the record in its entirety, we are of the
view that the interim arrangement which has been made by this Court vide its Order dated 7th
September, 2017 and orders passed thereafter shall continue with a liberty to the parties to file
independent proceedings for the custody or guardianship of the minor children before the
competent Court of jurisdiction which, if instituted, may be decided independently in accordance
with law and that alone would be in the best interest of the children.
37. The submission of the learned counsel for the respondent−wife seeking permission to withdraw
from the consent which was recorded by the High Court of Delhi in its Order dated 1 st March, 2013,
we would like to observe that it was a trilateral consent which was recorded by the High Court in its
Order dated 1 st March, 2013 which one party cannot be permitted unilaterally to seek withdrawal of
his/her consent and in our considered view, the consented order dated 1st March, 2013 will remain
operative until the parties to the consent order jointly move an application for withdrawal of their
consent as being recorded in its Order dated 1 st March, 2013 or until the Court of competent
jurisdiction is pleased to set it aside on permissible grounds and/or absolves the respondent−wife
therefrom.
38. The submission made by the learned counsel for the respondent−wife to put certain additional
conditions over the school authorities and obtaining her consent for any educational/recreational
trip of the children and the financial status of the appellant−husband which is spoiling the habits
and upbringing of the children as they are leaving behind the basic etiquettes of life, there may be
some substance in the submission made but that issue will have to be examined or tried in the
custody proceedings as and when filed by the concerned party. It may not be advisable for this Court
to record any finding in this regard which indeed may not be in the interest of the litigating parties.
Hence, we leave it open. If such a grievance is raised before the appropriate forum under the law,
certainly it may be looked into and may be decided independently without being influenced by the
observations being made by this Court expeditiously in accordance with law.
39. To finally conclude, we would like to observe that the interim arrangement made by this Court
regarding the custody/visitation rights of the parties vide order dated 7th September, 2017 and
further subsequent orders shall continue until further orders with the liberty to the parties to take
steps in filing of a custody/guardianship petition for the minor children before the competent Court
of jurisdiction and taking note of the interest of the minor children as a paramount consideration
being the sufferers of the matrimonial discord, if such an application is filed by either of the party,
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
11

that may be decided by the Court independently without being influenced/inhibited by the
observations made in the instant proceedings expeditiously in accordance with law. At the same
time Divorce Petition HMA No. 821 of 2011 shall be decided expeditiously as possible but in no case
later than 31st December, 2020.
40. The appeals are disposed of on the terms indicated above.
41. All pending application(s) stand disposed of.
….…………………………J. (A.M. KHANWILKAR) ..………………………….J. (AJAY RASTOGI) NEW
DELHI February 18, 2020
Soumitra Kumar Nahar vs Parul Nahar on 18 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180685623/
12
