Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15
January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 461, (2020) 1 ANDHLD 245,
(2020) 1 CURCC 248, (2020) 1 MAD LJ 837, (2020) 1 RECCIVR 721, (2020) 2
SCALE 123, (2020) 1 ALL RENTCAS 193, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 849,
AIRONLINE 2020 SC 35
Author: Hemant Gupta
Bench: Hemant Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                            REPORTABLE
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 190 OF 2020
        (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 16321 OF 2011)
SHRI UTTAM CHAND (D) THROUGH LRS.                         .....APPELLANT(S)
                                     VERSUS
NATHU RAM (D) THROUGH LRS. & ORS.                     .....RESPONDENT(S)
                         JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1. Plaintiff is in appeal before this Court aggrieved against judgment and decree passed by the High
Court of Delhi on 18 th February, 2011 whereby, the defendants second appeal was allowed and the
suit of the plaintiff for possession on the basis of title was dismissed.
2. The plaintiff filed a suit for possession on the basis of purchase of suit property from the
Managing Officer, Department of Rehabilitation, Government of India in a public auction held on
21st March, 1964. The certificate of sale was issued thereafter on 4th January, 1965. The plaintiff
filed a suit for possession on 17 th February, 1979 alleging the defendants to be in an unauthorised
possession of the suit property and who have refused to vacate the same.
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
1

3. The defendants in the written statement denied that the plaintiff is the owner of the property. The
defendants asserted that their house existed on the property in question for more than the last two
centuries. The grandfather of the defendants was said to be in possession of the property as owner,
thereafter their father one Tara Chand and now all the defendants are in possession of the property
as owners. It was denied that the property was ever vested with the Managing Officer and, therefore,
it was claimed that the Managing Officer has no authority or jurisdiction to auction the property in
question. Therefore, the plaintiff has no interest, right or title in the property.
4. Parties went to trial on the following issues:
“1. Whether the suit is properly valued for the purpose of Court fee & Jurisdiction?
2. Whether the suit is time barred?
3. Whether the plaintiff is the owner of the property in suit?
4. Whether the defendants become owner by adverse possession of the property in
suit?
5. Whether the defendants are in unauthorized occupation of the property in dispute?
6. Relief.”
5. Before the learned trial court, the plaintiff examined PW-4 Chander Bhan, Lower Division Clerk
from the Land and Building Department who has proved that the sale certificate was issued in
favour of plaintiff on 15th January, 1965. The learned trial court recorded the finding on the basis of
testimonies of Din Dayal Khanna (PW-3), Chander Bhan (PW-4) and S.B. Lal (PW-5) that the
property is situated in Khasra No. 9 and has been sold through auction. The learned trial court also
considered the testimonies of Bhagwan Dass (DW-1) and Ranjit (DW-2), both sons of the defendant,
that the plaintiff is the owner of the property purchased through Ex.B4/1 in an auction from the
Managing Officer, Department of Rehabilitation. Thus, Issue No. 3 was held in favour of the plaintiff
and the plaintiff was found to be owner of the property. But Issue Nos. 2, 4 and 5 were decided in
favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff and consequently the suit was dismissed but with a
direction to the plaintiff to make good the deficiency of court fee of Rs. 2000/- within one month in
view of the finding recorded on Issue No. 1.
6. In the first appeal by the plaintiff, the learned First Appellate Court affirmed the findings
recorded by the trial court on Issue Nos. 1 and 3 that the plaintiff is the owner of the property in
question. However, in respect of Issue No. 2 as to whether the suit is time barred, the learned First
Appellate Court returned a finding that the suit is within time as the same was filed on February 17,
1979 i.e. before the completion of 12 years. Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendants holding
that the findings recorded by the trial court that the limitation starts from the date of purchase of
the suit property is not sustainable. The right of the respondents over the property was challenged
before the completion of 12 years, therefore, the suit filed in February, 1979 is within period of
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
2

limitation. Under issue No. 4, the findings recorded were that the mere possession of land, however
long it may be, would not ripe into possessory title unless the possessor has animus possidendi to
hold the land adverse to the title of the true owner. The assertion of title must be clear and
unequivocal. Consequently, Issue No. 5 was also decided against the defendants and the suit stood
decreed.
7. In the second appeal, the High Court affirmed the finding of ownership in favour of the plaintiff
and relied upon electricity and house tax bills showing the possession of the defendants over the suit
property from November, 1963. It was, thus, held that the adverse possession of the defendants over
the same matured within 12 years, by November, 1995, therefore, the suit filed on 17th February,
1979 was barred by limitation.
8. The High Court referred to the statement of PW-1 Uttam Chand that the suit property was
assessed to house tax but no one had paid such tax. He stated that there was only one kachha room
of mud at the site but he did not know when the unauthorised construction was made in the suit
property. The High Court considered the statement of witness of the plaintiff to return a finding that
Tara Chand, deceased father of the defendants was found in possession of the suit property in
March, 1964. The High Court returned a finding that Tara Chand was in occupation of the suit
property even prior to the purchase of the same by the plaintiff in the year 1964.
The Court referred to the judgment of this Court reported as T. Anjanappa & Ors. v. Somalingappa &
Anr.1 to hold that the defendants were in open, uninterrupted, peaceful and hostile possession since
March, 1964 and the period of 12 years was completed in March, 1976. Therefore, the suit filed by
the plaintiff on 17th February, 1979 was barred by limitation.
9. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that for a successful plea of adverse possession against
the true owner, the person in possession has to admit hostile possession to the knowledge of the true
owner. The defendants in their written statement have not admitted the title of the appellant and of
adverse possession to the knowledge of the true owner. The defendants have denied vesting of the
land with the Managing Officer and the subsequent sale in favour of the appellant. The trial court
has returned a finding as to the title of the appellant itself and such finding has not been set aside
neither by the First Appellate Court nor by the High Court. The defendants are asserting their long
and continuous possession but such possession howsoever long cannot be termed as adverse
possession so as to perfect title within the meaning of Article 65 of the Limitation Act. It was argued
that long possession is not necessarily adverse possession. Reliance is placed upon Karnataka Board
of Wakf v. Government of India & Ors.2, Kurella Naga Druva Vudaya Bhaskara Rao v. Galla Jani 1
(2006) 7 SCC 570 2 (2004) 10 SCC 779 Kamma alias Nacharamma3 and Dagadabai (Dead) by Legal
Representatives v. Abbas alias Gulab Rustum Pinjari4.
10. On the other hand, learned counsel for the defendants argued that the witness of the plaintiff has
admitted the possession of the defendants in the year 1964 itself i.e. before the purchase, therefore,
the possession is adverse to the knowledge of the appellants.
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
3

11. In T. Anjanappa, this Court has set aside the finding of the High Court that the defendants
claiming adverse possession do not have to prove who is the true owner. If the defendants are not
sure who the true owner is, the question of them being in hostile possession as well as of denying the
title of the true owner does not arise. The Court held as under:
“12. The concept of adverse possession contemplates a hostile possession i.e. a
possession which is expressly or impliedly in denial of the title of the true owner.
Possession to be adverse must be possession by a person who does not acknowledge
the other's rights but denies them. The principle of law is firmly established that a
person who bases his title on adverse possession must show by clear and unequivocal
evidence that his possession was hostile to the real owner and amounted to denial of
his title to the property claimed. For deciding whether the alleged acts of a person
constituted adverse possession, the animus of the person doing those acts is the most
crucial factor. Adverse possession is commenced in wrong and is aimed against right.
A person is said to hold the property adversely to the real owner when that person in
denial of the owner's right excluded him from the enjoyment of his property.
3 (2008) 15 SCC 150 4 (2017) 13 SCC 705
13. Possession to be adverse must be possession by a person who does not
acknowledge the other's rights but denies them:
“24. It is a matter of fundamental principle of law that where possession can be
referred to a lawful title, it will not be considered to be adverse. It is on the basis of
this principle that it has been laid down that since the possession of one co-owner can
be referred to his status as co-owner, it cannot be considered adverse to other
co-owners.” (See Vidya Devi v. Prem Prakash [(1995) 4 SCC 496] , SCC p. 504, para
24.)
14. Adverse possession is that form of possession or occupancy of land which is
inconsistent with the title of the rightful owner and tends to extinguish that person's
title. Possession is not held to be adverse if it can be referred to a lawful title. The
person setting up adverse possession may have been holding under the rightful
owner's title e.g. trustees, guardians, bailiffs or agents.
Such persons cannot set up adverse possession:
“14. … Adverse possession means a [hostile possession] which is expressly or
impliedly in denial of title of the true owner. Under Article 65 [of the Limitation Act,]
burden is on the defendants to prove affirmatively. A person who bases his title on
adverse possession must show by clear and unequivocal evidence i.e. possession was
hostile to the real owner and amounted to a denial of his title to the property claimed.
In deciding whether the acts, alleged by a person, constitute adverse possession,
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
4

regard must be had to the animus of the person doing those acts which must be
ascertained from the facts and circumstances of each case. The person who bases his
title on adverse possession, therefore, must show by clear and unequivocal evidence
i.e. possession was hostile to the real owner and amounted to a denial of his title to
the property claimed. …
15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it will not be considered to be
adverse. The reason being that a person whose possession can be referred to a lawful
title will not be permitted to show that his possession was hostile to another's title.
One who holds possession on behalf of another, does not by mere denial of that
other's title make his possession adverse so as to give himself the benefit of the
statute of limitation. Therefore, a person who enters into possession having a lawful
title, cannot divest another of that title by pretending that he had no title at all.
(See Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant [(1995) 2 SCC 543, p. 554 : AIR 1995 SC
895, p. 902] , SCC p. 554, paras 14-
15.)”
12. In Kurella Naga Druva Vudaya Bhaskara Rao, the payment of tax receipts and mere possession
for some years was found insufficient to claim adverse possession. It was held that if according to
the defendant, the plaintiff was not the true owner, his possession hostile to the plaintiff's title will
not be sufficient. The Court held as under:
“19. The defendant claimed that he had perfected his title by adverse possession by
being in open, continuous and hostile possession of the suit property from 1957. He
also produced some tax receipts showing that he has paid the taxes in regard to the
suit land. Some tax receipts also showed that he paid the tax on behalf of someone
else. After considering the oral and documentary evidence, both the courts have
entered a concurrent finding that the defendant did not establish adverse possession,
and that mere possession for some years was not sufficient to claim adverse
possession, unless such possession was hostile possession, denying the title of the
true owner. The courts have pointed out that if according to the defendant, the
plaintiff was not the true owner, his possession hostile to the plaintiff's title will not
be sufficient and he had to show that his possession was also hostile to the title and
possession of the true owner. After detailed analysis of the oral and documentary
evidence, the trial court and the High Court also held that the appellant was only
managing the properties on behalf of the plaintiff and his occupation was not hostile
possession.”
13. In Brijesh Kumar & Anr. v. Shardabai (Dead) by Legal Representatives & Ors.5, the Court held as
under:
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
5

“13. Adverse possession is hostile possession by assertion of a hostile title in denial of
the title of the true owner as held in M. Venkatesh [M. Venkatesh v. BDA, (2015) 17
SCC 1 : (2017) 5 SCC (Civ) 387] . The respondent had failed to establish peaceful,
open and continuous possession demonstrating a wrongful ouster of the rightful
owner. It thus involved question of facts and law. The onus lay on the respondent to
establish when and how he came into possession, the nature of his possession, the
factum of possession known and hostile to the other parties, continuous possession
over 12 years which was open and undisturbed. The respondent was seeking to deny
the rights of the true owner. The onus therefore lay upon the respondent to establish
possession as a fact coupled with that it was open, hostile and continuous to the
knowledge of the true owner. The respondent- plaintiff failed to discharge the onus.
Reference may also be made to Chatti Konati Rao v. Palle Venkata Subba Rao [Chatti
Konati Rao v. Palle Venkata Subba Rao, (2010) 14 SCC 316 : (2012) 1 SCC (Civ) 452] ,
on adverse possession observing as follows: (SCC p. 322, para 15) “15. Animus
possidendi as is well known is a requisite ingredient of adverse possession. Mere
possession does not ripen into possessory title until the possessor holds the property
adverse to the title of the true owner for the said purpose. The person who claims
adverse possession is required to establish the date on which he came in possession,
nature of possession, the factum of possession, knowledge to the true owner,
duration of possession and that possession was open and undisturbed. A person
pleading adverse possession has no equities in his favour as he is trying to defeat the
rights of the true owner and, hence, it is for him to clearly plead and establish all facts
necessary to establish adverse possession. The courts always take unkind view
towards statutes of limitation 5 (2019) 9 SCC 369 overriding property rights. The plea
of adverse possession is not a pure question of law but a blended one of fact and
law.””
14. As to whether the plaintiff can claim title on the basis of adverse possession, this Court in a
judgment reported as Ravinder Kaur Grewal & Ors. v. Manjit Kaur & Ors.6 has held as under:
“60. The adverse possession requires all the three classic requirements to co-exist at
the same time, namely, nec vi i.e. adequate in continuity, nec clam i.e. adequate in
publicity and nec precario i.e. adverse to a competitor, in denial of title and his
knowledge. Visible, notorious and peaceful so that if the owner does not take care to
know notorious facts, knowledge is attributed to him on the basis that but for due
diligence he would have known it. Adverse possession cannot be decreed on a title
which is not pleaded. Animus possidendi under hostile colour of title is required.
Trespasser's long possession is not synonymous with adverse possession.
Trespasser's possession is construed to be on behalf of the owner, the casual user
does not constitute adverse possession. The owner can take possession from a
trespasser at any point in time. Possessor looks after the property, protects it and in
case of agricultural property by and large the concept is that actual tiller should own
the land who works by dint of his hard labour and makes the land cultivable. The
legislature in various States confers rights based on possession.”
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
6

15. The matter has been examined by a Constitution Bench in M Siddiq (D) through LRs v. Mahant
Suresh Das & Ors.7 wherein, it has been held that a plea of adverse possession is founded on the
acceptance that ownership of the property vests in another, against whom the claimant asserts
possession adverse to the title of the other. The Court held as under:
“747. A plea of adverse possession is founded on the acceptance that ownership of the
property vests in another against whom the claimant asserts a 6 (2019) 8 SCC 729 7
(2019) SCC OnLine SC 1440 possession adverse to the title of the other. Possession is
adverse in the sense that it is contrary to the acknowledged title in the other person
against whom it is claimed. Evidently, therefore, the plaintiffs in Suit 4 ought to be
cognisant of the fact that any claim of adverse possession against the Hindus or the
temple would amount to an acceptance of a title in the latter.
Dr Dhavan has submitted that this plea is a subsidiary or alternate plea upon which it is not
necessary for the plaintiffs to stand in the event that their main plea on title is held to be established
on evidence. It becomes then necessary to assess as to whether the claim of adverse possession has
been established.
748. A person who sets up a plea of adverse possession must establish both possession which is
peaceful, open and continuous - possession which meets the requirement of being ‘nec vi nec claim
and nec precario’. To substantiate a plea of adverse possession, the character of the possession must
be adequate in continuity and in the public because the possession has to be to the knowledge of the
true owner in order for it to be adverse. These requirements have to be duly established first by
adequate pleadings and second by leading sufficient evidence. Evidence, it is well settled, can only
be adduced with reference to matters which are pleaded in a civil suit and in the absence of an
adequate pleading, evidence by itself cannot supply the deficiency of a pleaded case. Reading
paragraph 11(a), it becomes evident that beyond stating that the Muslims have been in long
exclusive and continuous possession beginning from the time when the Mosque was built and until
it was desecrated, no factual basis has been furnished. This is not merely a matter of details or
evidence. A plea of adverse possession seeks to defeat the rights of the true owner and the law is not
readily accepting of such a case unless a clear and cogent basis has been made out in the pleadings
and established in the evidence.
xx xx xx
752. In Supdt. and Remembrance of Legal Affairs, West Bengal v. Anil Kumar Bhunja, (1979) 4 SCC
274, Justice R S Sarkaria, speaking for a three judge Bench of this Court noted that the concept of
possession is “polymorphous. embodying both a right (the right to enjoy) and a fact (the real
intention). The learned judge held:
“13. “It is impossible to work out a completely logical and precise definition of
“possession” uniformly applicable to all situations in the contexts of all statutes. Dias
and Hughes in their book on Jurisprudence say that if a topic ever suffered from too
much theorising it is that of “possession”. Much of this difficulty and confusion is (as
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
7

pointed out in Salmond's Jurisprudence, 12th Edn., 1966) caused by the fact that
possession is not purely a legal concept. “Possession”, implies a right and a fact; the
right to enjoy annexed to the right of property and the fact of the real intention. It
involves power of control and intent to control . (See Dias and Hughes, ibid.).” These
observations were made in the context of possession in Section 29(b) of the Arms Act
1959.
In P Lakshmi Reddy v. L Lakshmi Reddy, 1957 SCR 195, Justice Jagannadhadas,
speaking for a three judge Bench of this Court dwelt on the “classical requirement” of
adverse possession:
“4. Now, the ordinary classical requirement of adverse possession is that it should be
nec vi nec clam nec precario. (See Secretary of State for India v. Debendra Lal Khan
[(1933) LR 61 IA 78, 82] ). The possession required must be adequate in continuity,
in publicity and in extent to show that it is possession adverse to the competitor.” The
court cited the following extract from U N Mitra's “Tagore Law Lectures on the Law
of Limitation and Prescription”:
“7…An adverse holding is an actual and exclusive appropriation of land commenced
and continued under a claim of right, either under an openly avowed claim, or under
a constructive claim (arising from the acts and circumstances attending the
appropriation), to hold the land against him (sic) who was in possession. (Angell,
Sections 390 and 398). It is the intention to claim adversely accompanied by such an
invasion of the rights of the opposite party as gives him a cause of action which
constitutes adverse possession.” (6th Edition, Vol. I, Lecture VI, at page 159) This
Court held:
“7…Consonant with this principle the commencement of adverse possession, in
favour of a person implies that the person is in actual possession, at the time, with a
notorious hostile claim of exclusive title, to repel which, the true owner would then be
in a position to maintain an action. It would follow that whatever may be the animus
or intention of a person wanting to acquire title by adverse possession his adverse
possession cannot commence until he obtains actual possession with the requisite
animus.” In Karnataka Board of Wakf v. Government of India, (2004) 10 SCC 779,
Justice S Rajendra Babu, speaking for a two judge Bench held that:
“11…Physical fact of exclusive possession and the animus possidendi to hold as owner
in exclusion to the actual owner are the most important factors that are to be
accounted in cases of this nature. Plea of adverse possession is not a pure question of
law but a blended one of fact and law. Therefore, a person who claims adverse
possession should show: (a) on what date he came into possession, (b) what was the
nature of his possession, (c) whether the factum of possession was known to the other
party, (d) how long his possession has continued, and (e) his possession was open
and undisturbed.” The ingredients must be set up in the pleadings and proved in
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
8

evidence. There can be no proof sans pleadings and pleadings without evidence will
not establish a case in law.
In Annakili v. A Vedanayagam, (2007) 14 SCC 308, this Court emphasized that mere
possession of land would not ripen into a possessory title. The possessor must have
animus possidendi and hold the land adverse to the title of the true owner. Moreover,
he must continue in that capacity for the period prescribed under the Limitation Act.”
16. In the present case, the defendants have not admitted the vesting of the suit
property with the Managing Officer and the factum of its transfer in favour of the
plaintiff. The defendants have denied the title not only of the Managing Officer but
also of the plaintiff. The plea of the defendants is one of continuous possession but
there is no plea that such possession was hostile to the true owner of the suit
property. The evidence of the defendants is that of continuous possession. Some of
the receipts pertain to 1963 but possession since November, 1963 till the filing of the
suit will not ripe into title as the defendants never admitted the plaintiff-appellant to
be owner or that the land ever vested with the Managing Officer. In view of the
judgments referred to above, we find that the findings recorded by the High Court
that the defendants have perfected their title by adverse possession are not legally
sustainable.
Consequently, the judgment and decree passed by the High Court is set aside and the suit is decreed.
The appeal is allowed.
.............................................J. (L. NAGESWARA RAO) .............................................J. (HEMANT
GUPTA) NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 15, 2020.
Sri Uttam Chand (D) Th Lrs . vs Nathu Ram (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122806905/
9
