State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15
January, 2020
Author: Hemant Gupta
Bench: Hemant Gupta, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                             REPORTABLE
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 45 OF 2020
      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO. 4977 OF 2019)
STATE REP. BY THE INSPECTOR OF POLICE                      .....APPELLANT(S)
                                      VERSUS
M. MURUGESAN & ANR.                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)
                          JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1. The State is aggrieved against an order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras on 24 th
April, 2019 constituting a Heterogeneous Committee of named persons to give its recommendations
on the reforms that can be brought into practice for reformation, rehabilitation and re-integration of
the convict/accused person to society and best practices for improving the quality of investigation.
The Committee was mandated to submit report within eight weeks and that the State was directed
to furnish data for each District. The Committee was to scrutinize the same and submit the final data
separately along with the report.
The State was directed to provide office room for the Committee to conduct its meetings and to keep
the documents and other materials in safe custody.
2. Such directions came to be passed in a matter pertaining to grant of bail under Section 439 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 1.
The High Court had admitted the accused to bail on 18 th February, 2019 subject to certain
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
1

conditions but passed an order to call for the details of the cases registered by the Police, final report
filed, trial conducted and the result of such cases. The details were to bring to light the manner in
which the entire criminal justice system is operating in the State. In pursuance of the directions so
issued and the data provided, the impugned order was passed by the learned Single Bench.
3. The High Court after collecting the data in respect of the criminal cases registered, convictions
and acquittals in each District proceeded to write a thesis on how the criminal justice system should
function in the State. It was observed that the central aim of the criminal law is to reform the
offender and to rehabilitate him in a bid to render him useful to society. The Court held as under:
“16. The situation calls for a thorough revamping of the Criminal Justice system in
this State. It looks like the police are caught into this Vicious cycle. That shows on the
poor record of convictions in serious crimes. Instead of finding a complete cure for
the disease, police seem to be looking for temporary solutions without curing the
disease. Unless we agree that there is a serious problem, there is no scope for
change/improvement.
17. “Once a Criminal Always a Criminal” is the result of the present system prevailing
in this state. We have forgotten the fundamental purpose of Criminal Justice 1 for
short, ‘Code’ system which is reformation, rehabilitation and re-
integration of the convict into society. If an accused is pushed to the extremes by this system where
he finds that even if he wants to turn a new leaf in his life, this system will not allow him, he will
rather surrender to his fate and turn out to be a hardened criminal. A welfare state can never stoop
down to such a level.
xx xx xx
20. It goes without saying that the quality of investigation has come down drastically and the data
provided by the police, referred supra, makes it evident. The alacrity shown by the police in
registering FIR and effecting arrest, is not seen in investigating the case, laying final report and
taking the case to its logical end. The recent circular dated March 20 issued by DGP states that all
the police stations will henceforth have exclusive investigation wing. As per the directions, the
investigation wing will be responsible for investigation and prosecution of all cases registered in the
station, including cases identified by the law and order wing. Further, the police officers attached to
the investigation wing shall not be diverted to any bandobust work except with the prior approval of
the zonal IG or commissioner of police. This is a step on the right direction. A conscious effort
should be made by the investigating wing in every police station with the active coordination of the
directorate of prosecution to take every criminal case to its logical end. The police should not be
under the impression that their work gets over with registering FIR and effecting arrest. One of the
main challenges for the prosecution in Serious crimes is the witness turning hostile due to various
reasons. Witness protection scheme, 2018, which has now become the law of the land in view of the
judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mahender Chawla case (2019 (1) MWN Crl 340 (SC)) ,
must be implemented effectively. The investigation officers must be updated on a regular basis on
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
2

the March of law. Cyber crimes have reached monumental proportions and criminals committing
these offences are clearly having an upper hand since these criminals are intelligent crooks and
police officers require regular training and exposure to tackle these crimes. A complete overhaul is
required to enhance the quality of investigation.”
4. The matter before the High Court was as to whether the accused are entitled to be admitted to
bail, that is the jurisdiction conferred on the Court in terms of Section 439 of the Code. Before
granting bail, the High Court is enjoined upon an obligation to issue notice of an application for bail
to the Public Prosecutor if a person is accused of an offence which is triable exclusively by the Court
of Session or which, though not so triable, for punishment of imprisonment for life.
5. We find that the Hon’ble Single Bench has committed grave illegality in retaining the file after
grant of bail to the accused on 18th February, 2019. The jurisdiction of the High Court came to an
end when an application for grant of bail under Section 439 of the Code was finally decided.
6. In State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar & Ors.2, the High Court of Punjab & Haryana
after deciding a criminal appeal continued to pass order in respect of offenders in other cases not
connected with the matter which was dealt with by the High Court.
This Court deprecated the invocation of jurisdiction in a matter not connected with the appeal and
that too after passing of the final order. The Court held as under:
“86. In view of the law referred to hereinabove, the Bench was not competent to
entertain the said applications and even if the same had been filed in the disposed of
appeal, the court could have directed to place the said applications before the Bench
dealing with similar petitions.
2    (2011) 14 SCC 770
                               xx             xx           xx
91. There could be no justification for the Bench concerned to entertain the
applications filed under Section 482 CrPC as miscellaneous applications in a
disposed of appeal. The law requires that the Bench could have passed an appropriate
order to place those applications before the Bench hearing Section 482 CrPC
petitions or place the matters before the Chief Justice for appropriate orders.”
7. This Court in Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar referred to a case reported as Simrikhia v. Dolley
Mukherjee and Chhabi Mukherjee & Anr.3 wherein the Court observed that inherent powers under
Section 482 of the Code cannot be exercised to do something which is expressly barred under the
Code. It was held that inherent powers cannot be exercised assuming that the statute conferred an
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
3

unfettered and arbitrary jurisdiction, nor can the High Court act at its whim or caprice. The Code
does not confer unlimited/unfettered jurisdiction on the High Court as the “ends of justice” and
“abuse of the process of the court” have to be dealt with in accordance with law and not otherwise.
The High Court has not been given nor does it possess any inherent power to make any order, which
in the opinion of the court, could be in the interest of justice as the statutory provision is not
intended to by-
pass the procedure prescribed. It was also held that the High Court can always issue appropriate
direction in exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India at the behest of an
aggrieved person, if the court is convinced that the power of 3 (1990) 2 SCC 437 investigation has
been exercised by an investigating officer mala fide or the matter is not investigated at all, but even
in such a case, the High Court cannot direct the police as to how the investigation is to be conducted
but can insist only for the observance of due process as provided in the Code. The Court held as
under:
“51. The inherent power of the court under Section 482 CrPC is saved only where an
order has been passed by the criminal court which is required to be set aside to
secure the ends of justice or where the proceeding pending before a court, amounts to
abuse of the process of court. Therefore, such powers can be exercised by the High
Court in relation to a matter pending before a criminal court or where a power is
exercised by the court under CrPC. Inherent powers cannot be exercised assuming
that the statute conferred an unfettered and arbitrary jurisdiction, nor can the High
Court act at its whim or caprice. The statutory power has to be exercised sparingly
with circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. (Vide Kurukshetra University v.
State of Haryana [(1977)
4 SCC 451 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 613 : AIR 1977 SC 2229] and State of W.B. v. Sujit Kumar Rana [(2004) 4
SCC 129 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 984] .)
52. The power under Section 482 CrPC cannot be resorted to if there is a specific provision in CrPC
for the redressal of the grievance of the aggrieved party or where alternative remedy is available.
Such powers cannot be exercised as against the express bar of the law and engrafted in any other
provision of CrPC. Such powers can be exercised to secure the ends of justice and to prevent the
abuse of the process of court.
However, such expressions do not confer unlimited/unfettered jurisdiction on the High Court as the
“ends of justice” and “abuse of the process of the court” have to be dealt with in accordance with law
including the procedural law and not otherwise. Such powers can be exercised ex debito justitiae to
do real and substantial justice as the courts have been conferred such inherent jurisdiction, in
absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, or such powers as are necessary
to do the right and to undo a wrong in the course of administration of justice as provided in the legal
maxim quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest.
However, the High Court has not been given nor does it possess any inherent power to make any
order, which in the opinion of the court, could be in the interest of justice as the statutory provision
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
4

is not intended to by-pass the procedure prescribed. (Vide Lalit Mohan Mondal v. Benoyendra Nath
Chatterjee [(1982) 3 SCC 219 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 697] , Rameshchandra Nandlal Parikh v. State of
Gujarat [(2006) 1 SCC 732 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 481] , CBI v. Ravi Shankar Srivastava [(2006) 7 SCC
188 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 233] , Inder Mohan Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal [(2007) 12 SCC 1 :
(2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 259] and Pankaj Kumar v. State of Maharashtra [(2008) 16 SCC
117 : (2010) 4 SCC (Cri) 217] .)
53. The High Court can always issue appropriate direction in exercise of its power under Article 226
of the Constitution at the behest of an aggrieved person, if the court is convinced that the power of
investigation has been exercised by an investigating officer mala fide or the matter is not
investigated at all. Even in such a case, the High Court cannot direct the police as to how the
investigation is to be conducted but can insist only for the observance of process as provided for in
CrPC. Another remedy available to such an aggrieved person may be to file a complaint under
Section 200 CrPC and the court concerned will proceed as provided in Chapter XV CrPC. (See
Gangadhar Janardan Mhatre v. State of Maharashtra [(2004) 7 SCC 768 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 404] and
Divine Retreat Centre v. State of Kerala [(2008) 3 SCC 542 : (2008) 2 SCC (Cri) 9] .) xx xx xx
64. An inherent power is not an omnibus for opening a Pandora's box, that too for issues that are
foreign to the main context. The invoking of the power has to be for a purpose that is connected to a
proceeding and not for sprouting an altogether new issue. A power cannot exceed its own authority
beyond its own creation. It is not that a person is remediless. On the contrary, the constitutional
remedy of writs is available. Here, the High Court enjoys wide powers of prerogative writs as
compared to that under Section 482 CrPC. To secure the corpus of an individual, remedy by way of
habeas corpus is available. For that the High Court should not resort to inherent powers under
Section 482 CrPC as the legislature has conferred separate powers for the same. Needless to
mention that Section 97 CrPC empowers the Magistrates to order the search of a person wrongfully
confined. It is something different that the same court exercising authority can, in relation to the
same subject-matter, invoke its writ jurisdiction as well. Nevertheless, the inherent powers are not
to provide universal remedies. The power cannot be and should not be used to belittle its own
existence. One cannot concede anarchy to an inherent power for that was never the wisdom of the
legislature. To confer unbridled inherent power would itself be trenching upon the authority of the
legislature.”
8. This Court in a judgment reported as Sangitaben Shaileshbhai Datanta v. State of Gujarat4 was
examining a question where a court after grant of bail to an accused ordered the accused and their
relatives to undergo scientific test viz. lie detector, brain mapping and Narco-Analysis. This Court
held that direction of the court to carry out such tests is not only in contravention to the first
principles of criminal law jurisprudence but also violates statutory requirements. The Court held as
under:
“7. Having heard the counsels for the parties, it is surprising to note the present
approach adopted by the High Court while considering the bail application. The High
Court ordering the abovementioned tests is not only in contravention to the first
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
5

principles of criminal law jurisprudence but also violates statutory requirements.
While adjudicating a bail application, Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 is the guiding principle wherein Court takes into consideration, inter alia, the
gravity of the crime, the character of the evidence, position and status of the accused
with reference to the victim and witnesses, the likelihood of the accused fleeing from
justice and repeating the offence, the possibility of his tampering with the witnesses
and obstructing the course of justice 4 2018 SCC OnLine SC 2300 and such other
grounds. Each criminal case presents its own peculiar factual matrix, and therefore,
certain grounds peculiar to a particular case may have to be taken into account by the
court. However, the court has to only opine as to whether there is prima facie case
against the accused. The court must not undertake meticulous examination of the
evidence collected by the police, or rather order specific tests as done in the present
case.
8. In the instant case, by ordering the abovementioned tests and venturing into the
reports of the same with meticulous details, the High Court has converted the
adjudication of a bail matter to that of a mini-trial indeed. This assumption of
function of a trial court by the High Court is deprecated.”
9. In another judgment reported as Reserve Bank of India v.
General Manager, Cooperative Bank Deposit A/C HR. Sha & Ors.5, Reserve Bank of India
challenged an order passed on an application under Section 439 of the Code, wherein an argument
was raised that the poor depositors are not paid by the Bank out of the amount which has been
received by the Bank. The Court issued directions that the Bank should start distributing the amount
which is so far recovered by them from the accused. The Bank was directed to furnish details of the
money paid to the poor depositors.
The accused as well as the Investigating Officer and the Administrator of the Bank were directed to
remain present in the Court. This Court found that such directions are beyond the scope of an
application for bail filed by the accused under Section 439 of the Code. The Court held as under:
“6. We are of the opinion that the far-reaching consequences of the directions of the
High Court are in 5 (2010) 15 SCC 85 a way beyond the scope of an application for
bail filed by an accused under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the
High Court, as much as anyone else, must stay confined to the issues relevant to the
matter before it. It was thus not open to the High Court to pass orders which could
affect the working of banks all over the country.”
10. In Santosh Singh v. Union of India & Anr.6 while dealing with a public interest
litigation petition filed by a petitioner who was deeply distressed with the rapidly
degrading moral values in the society touching every aspect of life where making
money has become the sole motto of society, this Court held as under:
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
6

“18. While there can be no dispute about the need of providing value-based
education, what form this should take and the manner in which values should be
inculcated ought not to be ordained by the court. The court singularly lacks the
expertise to do so. The petitioner has a grouse about what she describes as the
pervading culture of materialism in our society. The jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 32 is not a panacea for all ills but a remedy for the violation of fundamental
rights. The remedies for such perceived grievances as the petitioner has about the
dominant presence of materialism must lie elsewhere and it is for those who have the
competence and the constitutional duty to lay down and implement educational
policies to deal with such problems.
19. There is a tendency on the part of public interest petitioners to assume that every
good thing which society should aspire to achieve can be achieved through the
instrumentality of the court. The judicial process provides remedies for constitutional
or legal infractions. Public interest litigation allows a relaxation of the strict rules of
locus standi. However, the court must necessarily abide by the parameters which
govern a nuanced exercise of judicial power. Hence, where an effort is made to bring
issues of governance before the court, the basic touchstone on which the invocation
of jurisdiction must rest is whether the issue can be addressed within the framework
of law or the 6 (2016) 8 SCC 253 Constitution. Matters of policy are entrusted to the
executive arm of the State. The court is concerned with the preservation of the rule of
law.
xx xx xx
23. It is unrealistic for the court to assume that it can provide solutions to vexed
issues which involve drawing balances between conflicting dimensions that travel
beyond the legal plane. Courts are concerned with issues of constitutionality and
legality. It is difficult to perceive how matters to which solutions may traverse the
fields of ideology, social theory, policy-making and experimentation can be regulated
by this Court such as by issuing a mandamus to enforce a scheme of instruction in a
particular subject in school education.
Should a subject be taught at all? Should a set of values or a line of enquiry and knowledge be
incorporated as a separate subject of discourse in an educational system? Would a horizontal
integration of a given set of values across existing subjects better achieve a desirable result? Is it at
all desirable to impose another subject of study upon the already burdened school curriculum?
24. These are vexed issues to which more than one solution may appear just. That is exactly the
reason why a resolution of such matters must rest with those who have the responsibility to teach
and govern over matters of education. Every good that is perceived to be in the interest of society
cannot be mandated by the court. Nor is the judicial process an answer to every social ill which a
public interest petitioner perceives. A matter such as the present to which a solution does not rest in
a legal or constitutional framework is incapable of being dealt with in terms of judicially manageable
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
7

standards.”
11. We find that learned Single Judge has collated data from the State and made it part of the order
after the decision of the bail application as if the Court had the inherent jurisdiction to pass any
order under the guise of improving the criminal justice system in the State. The jurisdiction of the
Court under Section 439 of the Code is limited to grant or not to grant bail pending trial. Even
though the object of the Hon’ble Judge was laudable but the jurisdiction exercised was clearly
erroneous. The effort made by the Hon’ble Judge may be academically proper to be presented at an
appropriate forum but such directions could not be issued under the colour of office of the Court.
12. In view of the above, we find that the order passed by the High Court on 24th April, 2019 is not
sustainable in law and the same is set aside. Consequently, the appeal is allowed.
.............................................J. (L. NAGESWARA RAO) .............................................J. (HEMANT
GUPTA) NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 15, 2020.
State Rep. By The Inspector Of Police vs M. Murugesan on 15 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27245513/
8
