State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2169, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
486
Author: Aniruddha Bose
Bench: Aniruddha Bose, Deepak Gupta
                                       NON-REPORTABLE
               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
            CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4499-4501 OF 2010
STATE OF KARNATAKA                                    ...APPELLANT
                               VERSUS
Y. MOIDEEN KUNHI (D) BY LRS. & ORS.                ...RESPONDENTS
                            JUDGMENT
ANIRUDDHA BOSE, J.
The State of Karnataka is in appeal before us primarily assailing a common judgment of the High
Court of Karnataka delivered on 7th November, 1990 confirming a decision of the Tribunal under
the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 treating a large part of an estate held by the respondents as
plantation land. The effect of such treatment would be that such land under plantation would be
exempted from the restrictions on holding imposed under that statute. Such exceptions have been
laid down under the provisions of Section 104 of the said Act. The dispute involved in this appeal
originated from a declaration filed by three individuals, being Y. Moideen Kunhi (in some
documents referred to as Noideen Kunhi), Y. Mohammed Kunhi and Y. Abdulla Kunhi under
Section 66(4) of the said Act on 5th December, 1975. As would be evident from the copy of a sale
deed made annexure “P-I” to the Special Leave Petition, the subject land was purchased by Y.
Mohideen Kunhi and Company, a registered partnership firm by the said deed registered on 24th
January, 1957 for a consideration of Rs.
2,75,000/-. From this deed, it appears that the property was known as “NERIYA CARDAMOMS
ESTATE”. The particulars of such land and its user status would appear from the schedule to the
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
1

said deed.
The relevant extract thereof we are reproducing below:-
“THE TOTAL ACREAGE IN THE ABOVE SCHEDULE:
PRICE (RS.)
1. Cardamom Planted area 50.89 acres 25,000-00
2. Coffee area inter-planted with 30.00 acres 10,000-00 orange-young-not yield
about
3. Paddy Punam Cultivation 462.00 acres 20,000-00 (Kumri) 55,000-00
4. Buildings:- 20,000-00 The residential Buildings-tiled One Smoke house-tiled One
set coolly line-tiled Shed and Wall Masonary
5. Forest Area; 3485.83 acres Rs.2,75,000-
          Consisting of partially cleared                   00”
          and un cleared area
                                                       (quoted verbatim)
2. The declaration under Section 66 of the Act was made by the aforesaid three
individuals before the Tahsildar (Land Reforms), Belthangady Taluk. The declaration
referred to properties situated in different Taluks, including the estate in Neria
village, Belthangady Taluk in South Kanara district. In the “Remarks” column of the
declaration, there was disclosure to the effect that though the subject-
lands were classified as “dry”, the same were being used for plantation purpose. The Land Tribunal
at Belthangady considered a spot inspection report dated 25.8.1982 carried out by the Special
Tahsildar, which found that out of the whole estate, Cardamom plantation was covering 2500 acres,
rubber plantation covered 220 acres and 100 acres was covered by coco. The declarants had claimed
exemption of 635.60 acres of land, as Rocks and hill slope, Road, streams and river, buildings and
area not covered by plantations. This inspection was followed by another spot inspection by the
Land Tribunal at Belthangady carried out on 10th September 1982 before the Tribunal gave its
decision. A copy of this report has been made annexure “P-5” to the special leave petition. This
report records that 2500 acres of land was covered by cardamom cultivation and 100 acres of land
was covered by rubber cultivation, so far as plantation lands were concerned. A revised order
bearing No. LRY 167/74-75 was issued on 16th September 1982 to the following effect:-
“The declaration filed by the declarents, the sketch of the surveyor, the spot
inspection report of Land Tribunal Secretary and available other relevant records
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
2

have been perused. The Chairman and the members of the Tribunal after conducting
spot inspection opined that the declarents after exempting are holding 530.16 acres
of D class agricultural land and as per their eligibility 162 acres of D class land is to be
in their possession and remaining 368.16 acres of D class land or its equivalent land
are ordered as surplus land under section 67(1) of Karnataka Land Reforms Act, and
to surrender the Same to Govt. under Section 67(2). The special Tahsildar to take
further action in the matter. The decision of the Tribunal is unanimous.” (quoted
verbatim)
3. Learned counsel for the appellant has brought to our notice another order of the
Land Tribunal, Madikeri (annexure “P3”) in which declarations were filed under
Section 66 (in form no. 11) by the wives of the said three individuals along with
certain other persons. There is reference in this order, dated 24th August 1982, to the
pending declaration before the Tribunal at Belthangady.
4. There was a review of the said order of the Land Tribunal at Belthangady passed on
16th September 1982. In the review order dated 10th November, 1982 majority of the
members confirmed the earlier order, with the Chairman of the Tribunal giving
dissenting note. The said order is reproduced below:-
“In the above case the Land Tribunal Belthangady after examining the declarations
filed by Sri Y. Mohiyuddeen Kunhi, Y. Mohammed Kunhi and Y. Abdul Kunhi under
Sec. 66 of KLR Act ordered that declarants were eligible to hold only 62.00 acres of D
Class land and remaining 368.16 acres of land were declared excess land under
sec.67(1) of KLR Act on 27.9.82. In the later stage it has come to the notice of the
concerned authorities that Land Tribunal erred while considering the case. The Land
Tribunal committed mistakes misconceiving the facts while issuing judgment on
27-9-82. Hence in order to rectify the errors, this case was re-examined under section
122 ‘A’ of KLR Act. The declarents have been given opportunities and finally
examined on 10-
11-1983.
Sri Y.Abdul Kunhi, one of the declarnats, has appeared before the Land Tribunal and given written
statement. He has also given explanations to series of queries raised by Land Tribunal. He has
explained that land purchased on 24-1-57 by M/s. Y.M.K. & Co. is entirely plantation land. The
declarents failed to prove that land purchased by the company is plantation land. Hence arguments
of the declarents that declarents may be exempted under Sec.104 of KLR Act and Sec. 66 not
applicable is unjustifiable. It is also of the opinion that the case attracts Sec.66 and to be dealt by
Deputy Commissioner under sec. 79 B of KLR Act. Hence Majority Judgment The orders of Land
Tribunal dated 16-9-82 and 27-9-82 is as per law. Before issuing this order Land Tribunal examined
the witnesses and inspected the land in question. During inspection of land it is noticed by Land
Tribunal that land belonging to declarants are covered by plantation crop like Rubber and coco.
Extent of land used for road, road margin, river streams and buildings are excluded while
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
3

determining excess land. Ultimately after considering all these factors 368.16 acres of land found
excess. The declarants have given entire information of the land in their declaration. They have not
given false information or hide any reality. This case to be dealt under section 104 of KLR Act and
hence sec.79B is not applicable. The Land Tribunal has got authority to review and reconsider the
case only in such cases wherein declarants have given incomplete and false information in their
declaration. But here declarants have given correct information about land in question. Hence in
this majority judgment we resolve that for no reason this case shall be reviewed.
This judgment is pronounced in this open court on 10.11.1982 under sec.122A of KLR Act.
Sd/-
Sd/-
Sd/-
Sd/-
Chairmans’ Minority Judgement The declarants represents a partnership firm. Hence these case
cannot be considered under sec.66 of KLR Act. Their declarations are to be examined by Deputy
Commissioner under section 79B of KLR Act. As explained in the preamble, Land Tribunal
misconceived the facts and misled by the incomplete information given by the declarants. Hence it is
right to review, Land Tribunal’s orders dated 27-9-82 under Section 122A of KLR Act. It is hereby
ordered to submit this case to Deputy Commissioner.” (quoted verbatim)
5. The State’s contentions are that the estate having been purchased by a firm and a large portion of
the estate being forest land, declaration under Section 66 of the Act was not the proper course to be
followed for ascertaining the position of the land vis-à-vis the ceiling limit as contemplated under
the 1961 Act. The stand of the State is that the status of such land should have been dealt with in
terms of the provisions of Sections 79A and 79-B of the 1961 Act. Both the State and the estate
owners, who are represented before us approached the High Court of Karnataka invoking its
constitutional writ jurisdiction seeking invalidation of the Tribunal’s order or part thereof.
6. The case of the State of Karnataka was registered as Writ Petition (C) No.10920 of 1983 whereas
the declarants’ writ petition was registered as Writ Petition No. 40425 of 1982. The declarants’ case
was that they were in possession and enjoyment of a total extent of 4040 acres and 95 cents and if
out of that total land, deduction was permitted in respect of area covered under plantation, land
under tenants with occupancy right and interspersed land, their holding would be within the ceiling
limit. The State’s argument has been summarised in paragraph 4 of the judgment of the Karnataka
High Court delivered on 7th November, 1990. By this judgment, both the writ petitions had been
dealt with. The said passage from that judgment reads -
“4. Likewise the State aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal at Annexure-B filed Writ Petition
no.10920 of 1983 contending that the Tribunal was not right in placing reliance on the report of the
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
4

Secretary to the Tribunal to arrive at the actual holdings of the declarants. Secondly, in all fairness
the Tribunal should have served a notice on the Government before taking the decision on the total
holdings of the declarants. Thirdly, the Tribunal erred in not taking into consideration that the
petitioners are not entitled to claim separate 10 units each on the date of filing their declaration as
they were the partners of the firm. Further, the Tribunal erred in not taking into consideration that
the firm as such is not entitled to hold any land as under Section 79-A of the Land Reforms Act,
there is a prohibition. The learned High Court Government Pleader also contended that the Tribunal
erred in incorrectly excluding the land alleged to have been covered under the planation without
giving an opportunity to the State to find out whether the lands are covered under the planation or
otherwise. For these reasons, the State also submits that the order of the Tribunal may be quashed.”
(quoted verbatim)
7. The High Court found the State’s case to be without any merit.
The reason for this, as observed in the judgment under appeal, was that correct classification was
made by the Tribunal on the basis of the report submitted by the Secretary/Tahsildar who was a
responsible officer for the State.
8. As regards contention of the State that the provisions of Section 79-B of the 1961 Act would be
applicable, it was negated by the High Court with the following reasoning:-
“……the next contention that in view of section 79- B of the Act the declarants are not
entitled to hold any land is also incorrect. They claimed the lands not as partners, but
in their personal capacity…...” (quoted verbatim) Further observation of the High
Court was that in proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution, the Court was not
to investigate into disputed question of facts. The writ petition of the declarants was
dismissed as withdrawn and the State’s writ petition was dismissed.
9. The State took out a petition for review of the said judgment in the year 2004. Before the Review
Court, the State had stressed on applicability of Section 79-B of the 1961 Act but this plea was
rejected by the Review Court. It was held by the Review Court that definition of land under Section
2(18) of the Act included forest land and plantation land. Referring to Section 104 of the Act, the
Review Court observed:-
“Section 2(18) of the Act defines the word “land”. The said definition is
comprehensive definition. The “land” includes forest land and plantation land. It is
clear from provisions of Section 79-A and 79-B and Section 80 shall not apply to
plantation lands. The explanation to Section 104 of the Act further denotes that the
plantation means the land used by a person principally for the cultivation of
plantation crop or for any purpose ancillary to the cultivation of such crop or
preparation of the same for the market, and agricultural land interspersed with the
boundaries of the area cultivated with such crop. Thus, it is not mandatory for the
holder of the plantation lands to file application under Section 79-B of the Act,
though the purchaser of the lands is a firm or company.” (quoted verbatim)
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
5

10. There are, in fact, three appals by the State of Karnataka. In two appeals, common judgment of
the Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court delivered on 7th November 1990 dismissing both the
writ petitions are assailed. The judgment of the High Court delivered in the Review Petition on 26th
September, 2007 has also been challenged before us in the third appeal. Before the Review Court,
plea of fraud on the part on the declarants and also the Tahsildar was asserted by the State. This
plea was rejected by the Review Court and the Review Court came to the conclusion that finding of
fact was given by the final fact-finding authority, being the Tribunal, and there was no scope of
further interference by the writ court. From the judgment of the Review Court, we find that point
was taken by the State that the estate was purchased by a firm but declaration of holding under
Section 66 was given by three individuals. But the Review Court did not find any flaw in such
exercise being undertaken by the individual declarants. On the other hand, the declaration filed
under Section 66 of the 1961 Act was found to be valid for the reason that it was not the firm who
had filed the declaration but three persons in their individual capacity.
11. For proper appreciation of the controversy involved in this appeal, it would be necessary to refer
to the following provisions of the 1961 Act:-
(a) “2(18). “land” means agricultural land, that is to say, land which is used or capable
of being used for agricultural purposes or purposes subservient thereto and includes
horticultural land, forest land, garden land, pasture land, plantation and tope but
does not include house-site or land used exclusively for non-agricultural purposes;
x x x
66. Filing of declaration of holding.- (1) (a) Every person who on the date of
commencement of the Amendment Act holds,—
(i) ten acres or more of lands having facilities for irrigation from a source of water
belonging to the State Government;
or
(ii) twenty acres or more of lands on which paddy crop can be grown with the help of rain water; or
(iii) forty acres or more of lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a
source of water belonging to the State Government, shall on or before the 31st day of December
1974];
(b) every person who acquires land in excess of the extent specified in clause (a) in any manner
referred to in section 64; and
(c) every person whose land is deemed to be in excess of the ceiling area under section 65-A, shall,
within the prescribed period, furnish a declaration to the Tahsildar within whose jurisdiction the
holding of such person or the greater part thereof is situated containing the following particulars,
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
6

namely:—
(i) particulars of all the lands;
(ii) particulars of the members of the family; and
(iii) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(1-A) Where a person holds different categories of land mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1),
the total extent of lands held by such person shall, for purposes of this section, be determined by
converting all categories of land into any one category in accordance with the following formula,
namely:— One acre of land referred to in category (i) = two acres of land referred to in category (ii) =
four acres of land referred to in category
(iii).
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Tahsildar shall have power to issue
notice requiring any person who he has reason to believe, holds land, or resides within his
jurisdiction to furnish to him a declaration of all lands held by him within such period as may be
specified in the notice (not being less than thirty days from the date of service of the notice), and it
shall be the duty of such person to furnish the declaration.
(3) Every declaration furnished under sub- section (1) or sub-section (2), shall be in the prescribed
form; and the person furnishing the declaration shall be entitled to obtain a receipt therefor.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every person who had held on or after
18th November 1961 and before the commencement of the Amendment Act,—
(a) ten acres or more of lands having facilities for irrigation from a source of water belonging to the
State Government; or
(b) twenty acres or more of lands on which paddy crop can be grown with the help of rain water; or
(c) forty acres or more of lands other than those specified in clauses (a) and (b), shall in respect of
the land so held by him also furnish a declaration within one hundred and eighty days from the
eleventh day of September 1975 to the Tahsildar within whose jurisdiction the holding of such
person or a greater part thereof is or was situated containing the following particulars, namely,—
(i) particulars of the land;
(ii) particulars of the members of his family;
(iii) particulars of lands transferred or disposed of in any manner prior to 24th January 1971 and
subsequent to that date;
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
7

(iv) particulars of the persons to whom lands if any, have been transferred or disposed of;
(v) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (1A), (2) and (3) shall mutatis mutandis apply to the declarations
to be furnished under sub-section (4).
xxxxxx
(b) The Karnataka Land Reforms Act underwent certain amendments by the Karnataka Act 1 of 1974
Sections 79-A and 79-B were introduced. The restrictions under Section 79-A were primarily based
on family income criteria whereas under
Section 79-B of the Act, it was on the basis of extent of holding. These provisions
contained in Chapter V of the Act imposed restrictions on acquisition and holding of
land by certain persons. Section 79-A (1) specifically prohibited person or family or a
joint family with specified amount of annual income from sources other than
agricultural lands from acquiring any land as land owner, landlord, tenant or
mortgagee with possession or otherwise or partly in one capacity and partly in
another.
For the purpose of sub-section (1) of Section 79-A, the aggregate income of all the
members of a family or a joint family from sources other than agricultural lands is to
be deemed to be income of the family or joint family, as the case may be from such
source. Methodology for computation of aggregate income is based on average
annual income of such person or family from such source.
As we have already referred to, Section 79-B deals with prohibition of holding
agricultural land by certain persons beyond a specified limit. Sub- clause (1) (a)
provides that no person other than a person cultivating land personally shall be
entitled to hold land. The said section further provides:-
(b) it shall not be lawful for,-
(i) an educational, religious or charitable institution or society or trust, other than an
institution or society or trust referred to in sub-section (7) of section 63, capable of
holding property;
(ii) a company;
(iii) an association or other body of individuals not being a joint family, whether
incorporated or not; or
(iv) a co-operative society other than a co-
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
8

operative farm, to hold any land.
(2) Every such institution, society, trust, company, association, body or co-operative society,—
(a) which holds lands on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act and which is disentitled
to hold lands under sub-section (1), shall, within ninety days from the said date, furnish to the
Tahsildar within whose jurisdiction the greater part of such land is situated a declaration containing
the particulars of such land and such other particulars as may prescribed; and
(b) which acquires such land after the said date shall also furnish a similar declaration within the
prescribed period.
(3) The Tahsildar shall, on receipt of the declaration under sub-section (2) and after such enquiry as
may be prescribed, send a statement containing the prescribed particulars relating to such land to
the Deputy Commissioner who shall, by notification, declare that such land shall vest in the State
Government free from all encumbrances and take possession thereof in the prescribed manner. (4)
In respect of the land vesting in the State Government under this section an amount as specified in
section 72 shall be paid.
Explanation.—For purposes of this section it shall be presumed that a land is held by an institution,
trust, company, association or body where it is held by an individual on its behalf.
xxxxx
104. Plantations.— The provisions of section 38, section 63 other than sub-section (9) thereof,
sections 64, 79-A, 79-B and 80, shall not apply to plantations. Explanation.—In this section
‘Plantation’ means land used by a person principally for the cultivation of plantation crop and
includes,—
(i) any land used by such person for any purpose ancillary to the cultivation of such crop or for
preparation of the same for the market; and
(ii) agricultural land interspersed within the boundaries of the area cultivated with such crop by
such person, not exceeding such extent as may be determined by the prescribed authority as
necessary for the protection and efficient management of such cultivation.”
12. On construction of different provisions of the 1961 Act, we find that in the event the Tribunal’s
finding is correct that the major part of the land which the declarants have claimed to be plantation
fits that description, then the prohibition imposed on holding of land by entities referred to in
Sub-section 1 of Section 79-B would not apply, having regard to the provisions of Section 104 of the
Act. But there is a factor which has not been clarified before us in course of hearing, which in our
opinion would have had material impact on the rival claims. As per the deed of sale, the partnership
firm had obtained forest area of 3485.83 acres. In the event this area is not held to be under
plantation, then the land which has been found by the Tribunal to be beyond ceiling limit would be
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
9

much beyond than what has been computed. Another issue which also appears to have not had been
considered by the Tribunal and also the High Court is that the estate was originally purchased by
registered firm. It has not been explained by the declarants as to how the estate of the firm devolved
upon its partners.
No legal instrument has been brought to our notice through which property of the firm became the
partners’ individual property. This issue is of significance because under Section 79(1)(b)(iii), there
is prohibition on an association or other body of individuals not being a joint family, whether
incorporated or not in holding land. The latter factor, however, would assume importance in the
event the land claimed to be under plantation is found to be incorrect as originally major part of the
estate was forest land. But to determine this question, we do not think proper examination of factual
situation had been undertaken. On this aspect of the dispute, State’s plea is that the spot inspection
took place in a single day and having regard to the area involved, such an exercise was impossible. If
this contention is examined in isolation, we would have had accepted the view of the High Court that
at this stage there ought not to be any factual enquiry. But considering the fact that land purchased
included large tract of forest land, we are of the view that the scrutiny on the part of the authorities
in the case of the declarants’ land was inadequate. This is one of the main grounds on which the
present appeal is founded. There is reference to a Writ Petition in the paper book filed by the
original declarants with prayer for felling of trees on the subject-land. The petition was registered as
Writ Petition No.42774 of 1982. In that proceeding an interim order was passed permitting felling of
trees by the petitioners as per a list subject to the provisions of the Karnataka Preservation of Trees
Act, 1976. After obtaining the interim order permitting such felling of trees, however, the writ
petition was dismissed as not pressed at the instance of the declarants by an order passed on 7th
November, 1990. The said writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn after obtaining interim order,
we do not think that the result of that writ petition would have any bearing on the present appeal. In
our opinion, neither the High Court nor the Tribunal has considered these important aspects of the
subject controversy. Without determining how forest land shown in the sale deed got transformed
into plantation land in the declaration, the decision on ceiling limit could not be taken.
We accordingly set aside the judgments of the High Court in the Writ Petition No.10920 of 1983 and
also judgment of the Review Court in Review Petition No.817 of 2004. We do not consider it
necessary to independently express our opinion in the appeal arising out of W.P. No.40425/1982 as
our opinion expressed in this judgment delivered in the other two appeals cover that decision as
well. The Tribunal’s orders in original and review, being LRY 167/74-75 dated 16th September, 1982
and LRY 167/74-75 dated 10th November, 1982 also are quashed.
We direct the Tahsildar to undertake fresh proceeding on the basis of the declaration filed under
Section 66 of the 1976 Act by the predecessors of the respondents. It shall be open to the authorities
undertaking such proceeding to examine as to whether declaration under Section 66 of the Act was
proper course or not for determining the issues in dispute, including the question of vesting of the
land or part thereof in the State. As substantial time has lapsed, we direct the proceeding under the
applicable provisions of the said Act to be completed in accordance with law within a period of
sixteen weeks.
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
10

13. The appeals stand allowed in the above terms.
14. Interim order, if any, shall stand dissolved. All other applications shall stand disposed of.
15. There shall be no order as to costs.
…..………………………….J. (Deepak Gupta) ……………..……………….J. (Aniruddha Bose) New Delhi, April
27, 2020.
State Of Karnataka vs Y.Moideen Kunhi(D) By Lrs. . on 27 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90483123/
11
