Sugandhi (Dead) vs P. Rajkumar Rep. By Power Agent Imamoli
on 13 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 807
Author: S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench: Sanjiv Khanna, S. Abdul Nazeer
                                                     1
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3427 OF 2020
                                (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.16491 of 2019)
     SUGANDHI (dead) by Lrs. & ANR.                            … APPELLANT(S)
                                                 VERSUS
     P. RAJKUMAR
     REP. BY HIS POWER AGENT IMAM OLI                           … RESPONDENT(S)
                                                ORDER
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal is directed against the Order dated 19.02.2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature
at Madras, Madurai Bench, in C.R.P.(NPD)(MD)No.2609 of 2018 whereby the High Court has
dismissed the revision petition filed by the appellants challenging the refusal to entertain an
application under Order 8 Rule 1A(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short ‘C.P.C.’)
seeking leave of the 14:44:46 IST Reason:
court to produce additional documents.
Sugandhi (Dead) vs P. Rajkumar Rep. By Power Agent Imamoli on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114694390/
1

3. The appellants herein are the defendants in the suit, O.S. No.257 of 2014, on the file of the
Principal Sub−Judge, Pudukottai, and the respondent is the plaintiff. For the sake of convenience,
parties are referred to in their respective positions before the Trial Court. The plaintiff filed the suit
for injunction alleging that the defendants are attempting to grab the suit schedule property. When
the suit was posted for the evidence of the defendants, they filed an application seeking leave to
produce certain documents. It was contended that they had recently traced these documents related
to the suit property and that was why they could not produce them along with the written statement.
This application was opposed by the plaintiff. The Trial Court by its Order dated 11th October, 2018
dismissed the application. As noticed above, the High Court has confirmed the order of the Trial
Court.
4. Mr. R. Anand Padmanabhan, learned counsel appearing for the appellants−defendants, submits
that the said documents are necessary for just determination of the case. Due to certain unavoidable
circumstances, the same could not be produced by the defendants along with the written statement.
It was argued that the courts below have rejected the application on flimsy grounds. He submits that
no prejudice whatsoever would be caused to the plaintiff by production of these documents.
5. On the other hand, Mr. S. Mahendran, learned counsel appearing for the respondent−plaintiff,
has supported the impugned orders of the courts below. It is argued that the defendants are not
entitled as a matter of right to produce the documents, particularly when the plaintiff has concluded
his evidence.
6. We have given our anxious consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel of the parties.
7. Rule 1A of Order 8 of C.P.C. provides the procedure for production of documents by the defendant
which is as under:
“1A. Duty of defendant to produce documents upon which relief is claimed or relied
upon by him.— (1) Where the defendant bases his defence upon a document or relies
upon any document in his possession or power, in support of his defence or claim for
set−off or counter−claim, he shall enter such document in a list, and shall produce it
in Court when the written statement is presented by him and shall, at the same time,
deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the written statement.
(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the defendant, he
shall, wherever possible, state in whose possession or power it is.
(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant under this
rule, but, is not so produced shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in
evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to document—
(a) produced for the cross−examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses, or
Sugandhi (Dead) vs P. Rajkumar Rep. By Power Agent Imamoli on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114694390/
2

(b) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.” Sub−rule (1) mandates
the defendant to produce the documents in his possession before the court and file
the same along with his written statement. He must list out the documents which are
in his possession or power as well as those which are not. In case the defendant does
not file any document or copy thereof along with his written statement, such a
document shall not be allowed to be received in evidence on behalf of the defendant
at the hearing of the suit. However, this will not apply to a document produced for
cross− examination of the plaintiff’s witnesses or handed over to a witness merely to
refresh his memory. Sub−rule (3) states that a document which is not produced at the
time of filing of the written statement, shall not be received in evidence except with
the leave of the court.
Rule (1) of Order 13 of C.P.C. again makes it mandatory for the parties to produce their original
documents before settlement of issues.
8. Sub−rule (3), as quoted above, provides a second opportunity to the defendant to produce the
documents which ought to have been produced in the court along with the written statement, with
the leave of the court. The discretion conferred upon the court to grant such leave is to be exercised
judiciously. While there is no straight jacket formula, this leave can be granted by the court on a
good cause being shown by the defendant.
9. It is often said that procedure is the handmaid of justice. Procedural and technical hurdles shall
not be allowed to come in the way of the court while doing substantial justice. If the procedural
violation does not seriously cause prejudice to the adversary party, courts must lean towards doing
substantial justice rather than relying upon procedural and technical violation. We should not forget
the fact that litigation is nothing but a journey towards truth which is the foundation of justice and
the court is required to take appropriate steps to thrash out the underlying truth in every dispute.
Therefore, the court should take a lenient view when an application is made for production of the
documents under sub−rule (3).
10. Coming to the present case, the defendants have filed an application assigning cogent reasons for
not producing the documents along with the written statement. They have stated that these
documents were missing and were only traced at a later stage. It cannot be disputed that these
documents are necessary for arriving at a just decision in the suit. We are of the view that the courts
below ought to have granted leave to produce these documents.
11. Therefore, for the foregoing reasons, the appeal succeeds and it is accordingly allowed. The
orders impugned herein are set aside. The application (I.A. No.551 of 2018 in O.S. NO.257 of 2014)
filed by the appellants−defendants before the Principal Sub−Judge, Pudukottai, is accordingly
allowed. Parties to bear their own costs.
…….……………………………J. (S. ABDUL NAZEER) …….……………………………J. (SANJIV KHANNA)
New Delhi;
Sugandhi (Dead) vs P. Rajkumar Rep. By Power Agent Imamoli on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114694390/
3

October 13, 2020.
ITEM NO.27     Court 10 (Video Conferencing)             SECTION XII
               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
 Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)    No(s).   16491/2019
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 19-02-2019 in CRP(NPD)(MD) No.
2609/2018 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At Madras At Madurai) SUGANDHI (DEAD)by
Lrs. & ANR. Petitioner(s) VERSUS P. RAJKUMAR REP. BY POWER AGENT IMAM OLI
Respondent(s) IA No. 102881/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.) Date : 13-10-2020 This
matter was called on for hearing today. CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. ABDUL NAZEER HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV
KHANNA For Petitioner(s) Mr. Anand Padmanabhan, Adv.
Mr. Shashi Bhushan Kumar, AOR For Respondent(s) Mr. S. Mahendran, AOR UPON
hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E R Delay condoned.
Substitution allowed.
Leave granted.
The Appeal is allowed in terms of the Reportable Signed Order.
All pending applications are disposed of.
(NEELAM GULATI)                                   (KAMLESH RAWAT)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                           COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Reportable Signed order is placed on the file)
Sugandhi (Dead) vs P. Rajkumar Rep. By Power Agent Imamoli on 13 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114694390/
4
