Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24
April, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2512, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
512
Author: Dinesh Maheshwari
Bench: Dinesh Maheshwari, A.M.Khanwilkar
                                                                                REPORTAB
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2374 OF 2020
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 24206 OF 2018)
                 SUJATA KOHLI                                      ….APPELLANT(S)
                         Vs.
                 REGISTRAR GENERAL, HIGH COURT
                 OF DELHI & ORS                                          ….RESPONDENT(S)
                                                        JUDGMENT
Dinesh Maheshwari J.
PRELIMINARY AND BRIEF OUTLINE Leave granted.
2. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 21.08.2018 as
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in W.P. (C) No. 3157 of 2015, whereby the High
Court dismissed the petition filed by the appellant, a member of Delhi Higher Judicial Service 1,
seeking to challenge the constitutional validity of Rule 27 of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules,
19702 and the Full Court resolutions dated 28.04.2009, 1 ‘DHJS’ for short.
2 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the Rules of 1970’. 15.01.2010 and 27.01.20113 concerning the
criteria for appointment of a member of higher judicial service to the post of District Judge and
Sessions Judge or its equivalent.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
1

3. While passing the order impugned, the High Court upheld the gradual implementation of the
eligibility criteria for promotion to the post of District and Sessions Judge or equivalent with
reference to the gradings in the Annual Confidential Reports4 in five years preceding the base year
of consideration. However, while concluding on the matter, the High Court also made certain
observations on desirability of uniform norms for award of such gradings; and issued directions for
evolving uniform grading system for future implementation.
RELEVANT RULES AND FULL COURT RESOLUTIONS
4. For comprehension of the principal submissions and the issues raised in this appeal, appropriate
it would be to take note of the relevant rules and the relevant part of the impugned resolutions at the
outset. 4.1. The relevant provisions concerning recruitment to the posts in the cadre of Higher
Judicial Service are contained in Rule 7 in the Rules of 1970. Rule 7(1), in its present form, reads as
under:-
“7. Regular recruitment.- (1) Recruitment to the posts in the cadre of District Judge at
Entry Level shall be as under:
(a) 65 percent by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division), having
a minimum ten years service in the cadre of Delhi Judicial Service, on the basis of
principle of merit-cum-seniority;
3 Hereinafter also referred to as ‘the impugned resolutions’. 4 ‘ACR’ or ‘ACRs’ for short
(b) 10 percent by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through limited competitive examination
of Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less than five years qualifying service; and
(c) 25 percent of the posts shall be filled by direct recruitment from amongst the persons eligible as
per rule 7C on the basis of the written and viva voce test, conducted by the High Court.” 4.1.1. The
provisions contained in Rule 7A of the Rules of 1970, as substituted by the notification dated
27.10.2009 and amended by notification dated 22.12.2011 could also be noticed as under:-
“7A. Selection for Promotion on the basis of merit and suitability.- Recruitment by
promotion under clause (a) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 7 above shall be made by selection
on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.” 4.1.2. The matters relating to appointment,
probation and confirmation are provided in Rules 12 to 15 in Part IV of the Rules of
1970, which are as follows:– “12. (1) Persons appointed to the service at the initial
recruitment shall stand confirmed with effect from the date of appointment.
(2) All other candidates on appointment to permanent post shall be on probation for a period of two
years.
EXPLANATION: - The period during which an officer holds a temporary post will be counted
towards probation but he will be confirmed only when a permanent post is available.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
2

13. All persons appointed' to the service on probation shall be confirmed at the end of the said
period of two years.
Provided that the Administrator may, on the recommendation of the High Court, extend the period
of probation, but in no case shall the period of probation extend beyond the period of three years.
14. The services of a person appointed on probation are liable to be terminated without assigning
any reason.
15. After successful completion of the period of probation the officer shall be confirmed in the
service by the Administrator in consultation with the High Court .and the same shall be notified in
the Delhi Gazette.” 4.1.3. In Part VI of the Rules of 1970, the provisions regarding pay and
allowances have been made; and these provisions also specify the method of assessment for granting
Selection Grade and Super Time Scale. Rules 18 to 20 in this Part VI read as under5: – “18. The pay
scales of the Service shall be as follows:
1 District Judges Entry level Rs,16750 . Time Scale (Addl. District -400-
                         Judges)                                           19150-
                                                                           450-
                                                                           20500
               2         Selection Grade [limited to                       Rs,18750
               .         25% of cadre posts of                             -400-
                         District Judges Entry level                       19150-
                         Time      Scale     (Additional                   4502185
                         District Judges) and will be                      0-500-
                         given to those having not                         22850
                         less than five years of
                         continuous service in the
                         cadre on assessment of
                         merit-cum-seniority]
               3         District Judges (Super time                       Rs,22850
               .         scale) (This scale would also                     -500-
                         be available to 10% of the                        24850
                         cadre strength of District
                         Judges, and would be given
                         to those who have put in not
                         less than three years of
                         continuous       service     in
                         selection       grade       on
                         assessment of merit-cum-
                         seniority)
19. The initial pay of a direct recruit shall be the initial pay in the time scale
mentioned in rule 18.
5 Rule 18 came to be substituted by way of the notification dated 22.10.2008.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
3

Provided that the Administrator may, on the recommendation of the High Court, give advance
increments to suitable candidates appointed to the service.
20. The pay of a promoted officer shall be fixed in the aforesaid time scale in accordance with the
financial rules, regulations, orders, or directions, applicable from time to time, to members of the
lAS.” 4.1.4. We may also take note of Rule 26 in Part VII of the Rules of 1970 which reads as under:
– “26. Direct recruits will have to produce before appointment a certificate of physical fitness in
accordance with the standards prescribed for the lAS.” 4.1.5. Rule 27 of the Rules of 1970, providing
for residuary matters, that had been questioned by the appellant as being ultra vires, reads as under:
– “27. RESIDUARY MATTERS:- In respect of all such matters regarding the conditions of service
for which no provision or insufficient provision has been made in these rules, the rules, directions or
orders for the time being in force, and applicable to officers of comparable status in the Indian
Administrative Service and serving in connection with the affairs of the Union of India shall regulate
the conditions of such service.”
5. Having taken note of the rules that are directly relevant for the case at hand as also the rules that
may have some bearing on the issues raised, we may now refer to the Full Court resolutions which
form the subject matter of this litigation.
5.1. In its Full Court meeting dated 28.04.2009, the High Court adopted a resolution to the effect
that, for the purpose of being selected/promoted as District and Sessions Judge, a candidate of
Higher Judicial Service ought to fulfil the criteria of possessing at least two ‘A’ (very good) and three
‘B+’ (good) in the ACR gradings for the preceding five years from the date of consideration for such
appointment. This Full Court Resolution dated 28.04.2009 reads as under:-
“Discussed. It was resolved as under:-
(i) The following shall be adopted as the zone of consideration for selection of officers
for appointment as District Judges:-
                 No.     of                   No. of officers
                 Vacancies                    within zone of
                                              consideration
In the case of Sessions Judge, the zone of consideration would be restricted to officers
already appointed as District Judges including on proforma basis.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
4

(ii) The officers who would be, or likely to be, in the zone of consideration for
appointment/selection to the post of District Judge in a particular year shall be under
the control of the Committee of Inspecting Judges headed by Hon’ble the Chief
Justice in the preceding year and in the year in question.
(iii) For evaluation of such officers, as are mentioned in the preceding clause, detailed
remarks shall be recorded in the ACRs by the Committee mentioned above.
(iv) For evaluation of the officers within the zone of consideration for “selection by
merit”, the following criteria shall be taken into account:-
(a) ACR grading for the last 5 years in which the gradings for at least 2 years
(including the 5th year) must be minimum “A” (Very Good), the officer having
secured in the remaining 3 years no less than “B+” (Good) grading. However, in the
case of SC/ST officers, this criteria shall be relaxed so as to require minimum “B+”
(Good) grading in each of the 5 years.
(b) Vigilance report.
(c) Disposal figures for the last 5 years.
(d) Administrative capabilities.
(e) General reputation for honesty & integrity and conduct.” 5.2. However, the
prescription aforesaid was modified by another Full Court resolution dated
15.01.2010 to the effect that for being selected/promoted as District and Sessions
Judge, a candidate of Higher Judicial Service ought to possess the minimum ‘A’ (very
good) grading in ACRs of each of the five years under consideration. It had been the
case of the respondent High Court that such criteria were adopted as being equivalent
to the revised promotion criteria in the Indian Administrative Services6. The relevant
part of the said resolution dated 15.01.2010 reads as under:-
“(a) The clause regarding relaxation in ACR gradings for SC/ST officers is deleted.
(b) The criteria in para 9(iv) (a) is modified so as to require ACR gradings for each of
the five years under consideration to be minimum ‘A’ (Very Good) for all categories.”
5.3. As against the aforesaid resolution dated 15.01.2010, the High Court received
certain representations, including those from Delhi Higher Judicial Services
Association as also from Delhi Judicial Services Association. These representations
were considered by the Full Court of the High Court in its meeting held on
06.07.2010 wherein it was resolved that a Committee be constituted by the Chief
Justice to look into the issue of desirability of change of criteria for appointment to
the post of District Judge. Pursuant to this resolution, Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
the High 6 ‘IAS’ for short Court, by his order dated 27.08.2010, constituted a
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
5

committee comprising of four Hon’ble Judges. This Committee, in its report dated
08.10.2010, recommended for implementation of the revised criteria in a phased
manner as under:-
“We find that the post of District Judge is to be manned by officers of Delhi Higher
Judicial Service in Super Time Scale of Rs.22850-24850 (pre-revised). Having regard
to the revised guidelines as circulated vide Govt. of India, DoPT O.M. No.
22011/3/2007-Estt(D) dated 18th February 2008 wherein it has been mentioned that
the DPC may ensure that for promotion to the scale of Rs.18,400-22,400
(pre-revised) and above, the prescribed benchmark of ‘Very Good’ is invariably met
in all ACRs of five years under consideration, we are of the opinion that the existing
criteria for appointment to the post of District Judge requiring ACR gradings for each
of the five years under consideration to be minimum ‘A’ ‘Very Good) for all
categories, should be maintained. However, since the criteria of “at least two ACR
gradings of ‘A’ (Very Good) and remaining three ACR gradings of ‘B +’ (Good)” fixed
on 28th April, 2009 was changed to “ACR gradings for each of the five years to be
minimum ‘A’ (Very Good)” on 15 th January 2010, we are of the opinion that the
implementation of the said criteria should be in phased manner as under:-
(i) At least two ACR gradings of ‘A’ (Very Good) and remaining three ACR gradings of
‘B+’ (Good) out of the ACR gradings for the last 5 years under consideration
(2004-2008) for the year 2009;
(ii) At least three ACR gradings of ‘A’ (Very Good) and remaining two ACR gradings
of ‘B+’ (Good) out of the ACR gradings for the last 5 years under consideration
(2005-2009) for the year 2010;
(iii) At least four ACR gradings of ‘A’ (Very Good) and remaining one ACR grading of
‘B+’ (Good) out of the ACR gradings for the last 5 years under consideration
(2006-2010) for the year 2011; and
(iv) ACR grading for each of the five years to be minimum ‘A’ (Very Good) for the last
5 years under consideration (2007- 2011) for the year 2012 and onwards.
We recommend that the cases for appointment to the post of District Judge be considered/reviewed
applying the aforesaid criteria as proposed.” 5.3.1. The aforementioned recommendations of the
Committee were accepted by the Full Court in its meeting held on 27.01.2011. 5.4. In the manner
aforesaid, the respondent High Court took the decision to implement the revised criteria envisaged
by the aforesaid resolution dated 15.01.2010 in a phased manner; and the requirements came to be
provided that for appointment to the post of District and Sessions Judge, a candidate should, in the
five years preceding the base year, carry the ACR gradings as follows:
(i) for the year 2009, at least two ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining three ‘B+’ (good);
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
6

(ii) for the year 2010, at least three ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining two ‘B+’ (good);
(iii) for the year 2011, at least four ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining one ‘B+’ (good);
and
(iv) for the year 2012 and onwards, a minimum of five ‘A’ (very good).
5.5. From the material placed on record by the respondent No. 1 with an application (IA No. 134092
of 2019), it appears further that the Administrative and General Supervision Committee of the High
Court, in its meeting held on 13.09.2013, resolved, inter alia, that the post of Principal Judge, Family
Court being equivalent to that of District and Sessions Judge, the same criteria be also adopted
therefor. This resolution was duly given effect to in the Full Court meeting by circulation dated
28.01.2014 as also in the subsequent Full Court resolutions.
5.6. With reference to the grievance of the appellant against denial of promotion to the post of
District and Sessions Judge or equivalent, we may also take note of a few of the relevant subsequent
Full Court resolutions, that have been placed on record by the respondent No. 1 with the said
application, IA No. 134092 of 2019.
5.6.1. It is noticed that for the purpose of the Full Court meeting by circulation dated 09.01.2015, the
position obtainable in the wake of the aforesaid three resolutions dated 28.04.2009, 15.01.2010 and
27.01.2011, was detailed out in the note prepared by the registry of the High Court. Thereafter, the
Full Court proceeded to adopt the resolution for appointment against the vacancies that had arisen
to the posts of District and Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court for various reasons,
including those of elevation of some of the incumbents to the High Court. Noticeably, the cases of all
the persons falling in the zone of consideration were considered, including that of the appellant; and
while making recommendations for appointment, some of the incumbents, including the appellant,
were not found fit for such appointment on the basis of the criteria laid down in the aforesaid
resolutions dated 28.04.2009, 15.01.2010 and 27.01.2011. The relevant part of this resolution dated
09.01.2015 reads as under: – “(i) Mr. Yogesh Khanna, Ms. Ravinder Kaur and Mr. Talwant Singh,
already District Judges under next below rule be recommended for appointment as District Judge
on regular basis w.e.f. 15.12.2014 against three vacancies of District Judges which have arisen w.e.f.
15.12.2014 consequent upon elevation of Hon’ble Mr. Justice P.S. Teji, Hon’ble Mr. Justice I.S.
Mehta and Hon’ble Mr. Justice R. K. Gauba as Additional Judges of this Court on 15.12.2014.
Against the vacancy fallen vacant consequent upon elevation of Hon’ble Ms. Justice Sangita Dhingra
Sehgal as Additional Judges of this Court, the names of officers in the zone of consideration were
considered and it was decided that on the criteria of ‘selection by merit’ as laid down by the Full
Court decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011
, the name of Mr. T.R. Naval, DHJS be recommended for appointment to the post of District Judge
on regular basis with effect from the date he takes over.
Against the consequential vacancies on account of District Judges being on deputation, the names of
officers in the zone of consideration were considered and it was decided that on the criteria of
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
7

‘selection by merit’ as laid down by the Full Court decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full
Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011, the names of Mr. Rakesh Sidhartha, Mr. Amar Nath,
Mr. Pradeep Chadha and Mr. Brijesh Sethi, DHJS be recommended for appointment to the post of
District Judge under next below rule with effect from the date they take over. Since Ms. Asha
Menon, DHJS is on deputation as Member Secretary, NALSA, her name be also recommended to
the Govt. of NCT of Delhi for appointment as District Judge on proforma basis with effect from the
date her juniors take over.
Mr. S.C. Malik, Mr. R. P.S. Teji, Mr. S.C. Rajan, Mr. Mahavir Singhal, Mr. D.K. Malhotra, Mr.
Sukhdev Singh, Mr. Rajnish Bhatnagar and Mr. Narender Kumar Sharma, DHJS were not found fit
for appointment to the post of District Judge on the criteria of ‘selection by merit’ as laid down by
the Full Court decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and
27.1.2011.
The recommendation for appointment of Mr. Brijesh Sethi, DHJS to the post of District Judge
under next below rule be made to the Administrator, NCT of Delhi on receipt of notification of
appointment of Ms. Kiran Nath, DHJS as Principal Secretary (Law, Justice & Legislative Affairs),
Govt. of NCT of Delhi.
On receipt of notification of appointment as District Judges, their postings be made as per
Annexure’X’.
(ii) The name of Mr. Girish Kathpalia, already Principal Judge, Family Courts under next below rule
be recommended for appointment as Principal Judge, Family Courts on regular basis with effect
from the date Shri T.R. Naval relinquishes the charge of the post of Principal Judge, Family Courts,
Delhi.
Against the consequential vacancies of Principal Judge, Family Courts, the names of officers in the
zone of consideration were considered and on the criteria of ‘selection by merit’ as laid down by the
Full Court decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and
27.1.2011, the names of Ms. Poonam A. Bamba, Mr. A.S. Jayachandra, Mr. Deepak Jagotra, Mr. Braj
Raj Kedia and Mr. Yashwant Kumar, DHJS be recommended for appointment to the post of
Principal Judge, Family Courts, Delhi for the districts mentioned against their names on regular
basis with effect from the date they take over:-
Sl.No.      Name of the Officer            District
            (Mr. Ms.)
1.          Poonam A. Bamba                South, Saket
2.          A.S. Jayachandra               North-
                                           East,
                                           Vishwas
                                           Nagar
3.          Deepak Jagotra                 South-
                                           East,
                                           Saket
4.          Braj Raj Kedia                 Shahdara
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
8

                                           ,
                                           Karkardoo
                                           ma
5.          Yashwant Kumar                 West,
                                           THC
Mr. S.C. Malik Mr. R.P.S. Teji, Mr. S.C. Rajan, Mr. Mahavir Singhal, Mr. D.K. Malhotra, Mr.
Sukhdev Singh, Mr. Rajneesh Bhatnagar, Mr. Narender Kumar Sharma, Mr. J.P.S. Malik, Mr. K.S.
Mohi, Ms. Sujata Kohli, Mr. Rakesh Tiwari, Mr. Chandra Gupta and Mr. Narottam Kaushal were not
found fit for appointment to the post of Principal Judge, Family Courts on the criteria of ‘selection
by merit’ as laid down by the Full Court decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full Court
decisions dated 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011.
The recommendations for appointment of Mr. Yashwant Kumar DHJS to the post of Principal
Judge, Family Court, West, THC under next below rule be made to the Administrator, NCT of Delhi
on receipt of notification of appointment of Mr. Brijesh Sethi, DHJS as District Judge under next
below rule.” (underlining supplied) 5.6.2. It further appears that in the subsequent resolutions dated
16.04.2015, 19.09.2015 and 28.11.2016, various recommendations were made by the Full Court for
appointment to the post of District and Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court. In these
resolutions, the cases of all the persons falling in the zone of consideration (including the appellant)
were considered but, while making recommendations, some of the incumbents, including the
appellant, were not found fit for such appointment on the basis of the criteria laid down in the
aforesaid resolutions dated 28.04.2009, 15.01.2010 and 27.01.2011. For avoiding unnecessary
repetition of similar aspects, all such resolutions need not be reproduced but, for ready reference,
we may extract the relevant part of the last of such resolution dated 28.11.2016 as under: –
“….Against the consequential vacancy on account of Mr. Girish Kathpalia being on deputation, the
names of officers in the zone of consideration were considered and it was decided that on the criteria
of ‘selection by merit’ as laid down by the Full Court decision dated 28.4.009 and modified by Full
Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011, the name of Mr. A.S.Jayachandra be recommended
for appointment to the post of District Judge under next below rule with effect from the date he
takes over.
Mr. R.P.S. Teji, Mr.Mahavir Singhal and Ms. Sujata Kohli, DHJS were not found fit for appointment
to the post of District Judge on the criteria of ‘selection by merit’ as laid down by the Full Court
decision dated 28.4.2009 and modified by Full Court decisions dated 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011.”
(underlining supplied) THE FACTS RELATING TO THE APPELLANT AND HER GRIEVANCE
6. Having taken note of the relevant rules and the relevant resolutions, the basic facts relating to the
appellant and the principal aspects of her grievance could now be recounted, in brief, as follows:
6.1. The appellant, having successfully competed in the written examination and
interview, secured third position in her batch for direct selection to the cadre of
DHJS and was duly appointed on 27.11.2002.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
9

Later on, her position in the batch became second with resignation of the candidate at second
position. Thereafter, by virtue of the notification dated 19.12.2005, the appellant was appointed as
Additional District and Sessions Judge (Permanent) w.e.f. 25.11.2004. It is not in dispute that the
service conditions of the appellant are governed by the said Rules of 1970. 6.2. It is also not in
dispute that for the period between May 2011 to January 2014, the appellant was assigned cases
under the Hindu Marriage Act and other relatable matrimonial matters, during which period, she
disposed of approximately 2589 cases, which included 478 amicable settlements.
6.3. The ACR gradings of the appellant for the relevant years had been that she was awarded ‘B+’
(good) in the years 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013; and she was awarded ‘A’ (very good) in the year
2014.
6.4. It has been the case of the appellant that she became aware of the impugned resolutions only
when the judicial officers appointed in the year 2002 were considered for promotion to the post of
District and Sessions Judge/Principal Judge, Family Court in the month of November 2014. The
appellant would submit that immediately after noticing the prejudicial requirements of the
impugned resolutions, she addressed a representation dated 12.11.2014 to the Chief Justice and the
companion judges of the High Court of Delhi for reconsideration of the criteria laid down in the
impugned resolutions. It is the contention of the appellant, that no reply was offered on her
representation but, on 02.12.2014, she was granted Super Time Scale by the High Court by way of
notification No. 27/DHC/Gaz/ST/VI.D.10/2014. 6.5. On 13.01.2015, the appellant made another
representation to the Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi apprising about her pending
representation and prayed that the proposed appointments may be kept on hold.
6.6. The grievance of the appellant had been that despite her representations, several appointments
were made to the post of Principal Judge, Family Court from the candidates of her batch who were
junior in rank to herself as also from the candidates of later batches. Aggrieved that her
representations were not considered to review the criteria in question as also by promotion of the
incumbents junior to herself, appellant preferred the writ petition before the High Court while
seeking the following reliefs:-
“a) quashing the notifications No. F.6/15/2012-
JudL/FC/Supt1aw/54-57 dated 15.1.2015 and No. F.6/2/2015JudL/Suptlaw/109-112
dated 22.1.2015.
b) quashing the full Court resolutions dated 28.4.2009, 15.1.2010 and 27.1.2011
adopted by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, with respect to evolving the requirement
of Grade A (if any), adopted on the said dates or at any other time for
recommendation for appointment/ promotion to the post of District Judge! Principal
Judge, Family Court.
c) Quashing the Rule 27 of Delhi Hiher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 and direct the framing of
specific Rules for the promotion/ appointment to the post of District and Sessions Judge/Principal
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
10

Judge, Family Court.
(ii) Direct the Respondent No. 1 to consider the petitioner for recommendation for the
appointment/promotion to the Post of Principal Judge Family Court/ District and Sessions Judge as
per her entitlement.
(iii) pass such other orders or directions as deemed fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of
the case.” SUBMISSIONS BEFORE THE HIGH COURT
7. Seeking the reliefs aforesaid, the appellant submitted before the High Court, inter alia, that prior
to the year 2009, several candidates having only ‘B+’ or even ‘B’ grade were promoted as District
and Sessions Judge and, when the batch of the year 2002 was being considered for appointment to
the post of District Judge in the year 2014, she came to know of the requirements envisaged by the
impugned resolutions. The appellant contended that failure in communication of the mandated
conditions had jeopardised her promotional prospects. 7.1. It was also contended that the impugned
resolutions were violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India, for being opposed to the
reasonable expectations for selection and vertical promotion, in terms of the service conditions. The
appellant further submitted that application of the same criteria to judges as applicable to those in
the Indian Administrative Service was against the very essence of the decision of this Court in All
India Judges Association v. Union of India: (1993) 4 SCC 288, where it was held that there cannot
be any parity between the judges and the administrative officers.
7.2. The appellant further referred to the decision of this Court in Dev Dutt v. Union of India:
(2008) 8 SCC 725 and submitted that granting better grading (‘A’) to a set of junior officers and
giving lower grading (‘B+’) to senior, tantamount to adverse ACR for the senior and hence, the High
Court establishment ought to have disclosed not merely the concerned officer’s grading, but also
those of her juniors, so that she could have taken recourse of fair and effective redress, by pointing
out her strengths, which might well have been overlooked by the appraising authorities. The
appellant also argued that though the ACR grades were made known to the judicial officers, yet the
pointwise grades were not made known to them, which was required to be provided so as to assist
the concerned officer to grow and also to appeal against, if the same were found to be arbitrary.
8. While opposing the submissions of the appellant, the respondent High Court establishment
submitted, inter alia, that after the impugned resolutions dated 28.04.2009 and 15.01.2010, the
establishment received various representations which were considered in the meeting held on
06.07.2010 and, pursuant to the resolution adopted therein, a Committee was constituted to deal
with the issue concerning the criteria for appointment to the post of District Judge. The respondent
submitted that in its report dated 08.10.2010, the Committee recommended for maintaining the
criteria of possessing “very good” grading in five years immediately preceding the year of
appointment but suggested that the same be implemented in a phased manner; and while accepting
such recommendations, the resolution dated 27.01.2011 came to adopted by the Full Court (as
noticed hereinbefore). It was submitted that the High Court, being the best judge to assess as to
which judicial officer was suited to the work, was entitled to fix the criteria for the appointment in
question; and it was denied that such criteria had adversely affected the progression of Additional
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
11

District Judges.
8.1. It was also contended by the respondent that the appellant had failed to show any flaw or
unreasonableness in the criteria as laid down; that there was no requirement for publication of the
promotional criteria, as it did not require obtaining of any additional qualification or likewise; that
every employee was expected to work to the best of his ability and professional competence; and
that raising a complaint against the promotional criteria was meaningless and unwarranted. The
respondent also pointed out that for awarding ACR gradings, three judges of the High Court were
assigned the task of supervising the functioning of the judicial officers and verification of the
information drawn up qua them; and the respective grades were made known only to the individual
concerned. 8.2. The respondent establishment also defended Rule 27 of the Rules of 1970 with the
submissions that guidelines and criteria need to be evolved having regard to the changing times; and
as all the matters and contingencies cannot be prescribed in the rules, discretion of the competent
authority is reserved but without vesting any arbitrary power. 8.3. It was also pointed out on behalf
of the respondent establishment that the appellant was granted super time scale w.e.f. 01.07.2013;
she made the representation on 12.11.2014 for reconsideration of the criteria in question; her
representation was rejected by the Full Court on 29.04.2015; and the decision was communicated to
her on 13.05.2015. DECISION OF THE HIGH COURT: THE IMPUGNED ORDER
9. In its impugned judgment and order dated 21.08.2018, the High Court referred to the decisions of
this Court in Chandramouleshwar Prasad v. Patna High Court: AIR 1970 SC 370 and State of Bihar
v. Bal Mukund Sah: 2000 (4) SCC 640, wherein Articles 233 and 235 of the Constitution of India
were referred and primacy of the views of the High Court in the appointment of District Judges was
highlighted. The High Court also analysed the aforementioned Full Court resolutions and proceeded
to examine the grievance of the appellant with respect to her lack of knowledge or not being aware of
the criteria to be fulfilled. 9.1. The High Court did not find any merit in the argument of the
petitioner-appellant that she was aggrieved due to non-communication of the revised criteria while
observing that before 2008-2009, there were no criteria fixed for the purpose, which meant that the
High Court establishment had the discretion in the matter of selection and appointment of the
District Judges, either in terms of seniority or merit. The High Court observed that such “no norms”
position was sought to be rectified by structuring the discretion with emphasis on certain threshold
gradings and such administrative criteria cannot be termed as arbitrary. The observations of the
High Court, forming the core of its decision, could be usefully reproduced as under: – “22. The
petitioner’s grievance with respect to her lack of knowledge or not being aware of the criteria to be
fulfilled by incumbent DHJS officers, in the opinion of this court, is not justified. Before 2008-09
there was no criteria, which meant that the High Court more or less had the absolute discretion to
select and appoint anyone, on the basis of seniority, or merit. This “no norm” period was sought to
be rectified by structuring the discretion, and insisting that the concerned officers ought to score
certain threshold gradings in their ACRs to be eligible for consideration. Such administrative
criteria, per se cannot be characterized as arbitrary, given the prevailing “no norm” or “no rule”
period. Though not a matter of record, it is a fact that around that time, the existing one District
court’s territorial jurisdiction for the whole of Delhi was re-organized; nine District Courts were
created, with resultant distribution of jurisdiction. That has now been further re- organized. The
consequent need to fill nine posts was felt. The committee, which reported to the Full Court on
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
12

14.12.2009, took into account the identity of pay scales of District Judges and equivalent grade All
India Service (IAS) officers and felt that since the former had to cross a threshold bar of five “Very
good” ACR gradings for five years, preceding the date of consideration (for higher positions), a
similar approach could be adopted. As was highlighted by Chandramouleshwar Prasad “the High
Court is the body which is intimately familiar with the efficiency and quality of officers who are fit to
be promoted as District Judges. The High Court alone knows their merits as also demerits.”
Likewise, Bal Mukund Shah (supra) emphasized the same theme:
“..rules made by the Governor in consultation with the High Court in case of
recruitment at grass-root level and the recommendation of the High Court for
appointments at the apex level of the District Judiciary under Article 233 remain the
sole repository of power to effect such recruitments and appointments. It is easy to
visualise that if suitable and competent candidates are not recruited at both these
levels, the out turn of the judicial product would not be of that high level which is
expected of judicial officers so as to meet the expectations of suffering humanity
representing class of litigants who come for redressal of their legal grievances at the
hands of competent, impartial and objective Judiciary.”
23. Having regard to these imperatives, the petitioner’s grievance that no norm
should have been evolved and implemented without prior notice, is insubstantial. A
judicial officer – like any other public employee or official joins the service, hoping to
make a difference, in terms of dealing with the workload, quality of output (i.e. the
judgments delivered) and also the cases assigned to her. In a sense, service in the
judicial department (though a public service) is a mission, given the solemn nature of
judging. If this is the assumption on which every judge, at every level is appointed to
the judicial system, the argument that if one is made aware that a higher threshold of
performance is expected, she or he would work better (or have worked better) cannot
be countenanced.
All judges – District Judges being no exception – are expected to perform at their optimum levels,
given the exploding dockets, which they have to handle. The primary role of anyone, when
appointed as a judge is to perform as a judge, to the best of her ability and competence. An
incumbent cannot be heard to say that her judicial work was not up to the mark, because she was
involved in some other duties or more importantly, she was not aware that best performance would
result in selection as District Judge. Every functionary- including judges shoulder those extra duties
to varying degrees, at different points of time. Nor do those duties define the role of any incumbent
in a judicial service or system. If seen from this perspective, the work performed by every judicial
officer is what is graded in the ACR. Therefore, to say that had any incumbent known that the
highest or a better grading is essential she or he would have performed better is no grievance. The
performance of every judge is expected to be her or his best, or what she or he was capable of, for the
relevant period. Therefore, the nuancing of discretion (to appoint) from an absolute one, to one
based on performance and merit, of DHJS officers, is neither arbitrary nor unreasonable. One more
reason to reject the petitioner’s argument in this regard is that the review which took place through
the Full Court resolution of 27 January 2011, was due to representation of DHJS officers that
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
13

introduction of the five ACR norm was abrupt. Therefore, there was a general awareness of this
criteria, (put in place through the earlier resolution of 15-01-2010) which led to some disquiet and
representation. The criteria which now stands challenged was therefore evolved as a measure to
relax the rigors of their immediate application. It has been applied in the case of many instances of
appointment; some of those appointees have since even retired; some were appointed as judges of
this court. Even from that position, some appointees have retired. Therefore, it is too late in the day
to say that the criteria should be set aside on the narrow ground that it was not made known. As
members of a judicial cadre, all officers were aware of its existence. This ground therefore, is
rejected.” 9.2. The grievance of the appellant about absence of any information of the gradings of
juniors was also found baseless. The High Court referred to the law declared by this Court as regards
the necessity of communication of every ACR grading, particularly that in the case of Dev Dutt
(supra) and observed as under:-
“The petitioner’s grievance however, is that the better or higher gradings given to her
colleagues, particularly those junior to her were not known and that she could not
articulate her objections to better her gradings, at the relevant time. This court is of
the opinion that the method of appraisal of judicial officers is such that gradings
given to each individual are treated as confidential. In such a system, it would not be
permissible to publicize the gradings of all judicial officers, so that each one has
information or knowledge of not only what she is graded, but also what others are
graded. This grievance is therefore held to be without substance.” 9.3. In the manner
aforesaid, the High Court proceeded to reject the contentions of the appellant.
However, before concluding, the High Court observed that though the existing
system of grading of the judicial officers by the committees comprising of three High
Court judges was merited but there being no uniform set of rules or guidelines for the
appraisal committees to follow, it was in the fitness of things that to inject greater
uniformity and objectivity as also some measure of transparency and predictability,
certain norms and performance indicators be kept in view by the evaluation
authorities. The High Court proceeded to broadly lay down such norms and
indicators in the penultimate paragraph of its order and, ultimately, concluded on the
writ petition in the following: – “29. In view of the above discussion, the court holds
that the Full Court resolutions of 28.4.2009 (modified on 15.01. 2010) and the later
resolution 27.01.2011, inasmuch as they prescribe that for appointment to the post of
District Judge, the concerned judicial officer should have been graded A in the
preceding five years, is not arbitrary; the challenge to Rule 27 too has to fail. The
petitioner†s grievance that she was arbitrarily denied knowledge of the ACR gradings
of other officers, is also without merit. This court hereby requires that the directions
in the preceding para of this judgment with respect to formulation of criteria for
uniform grading of judicial officers, be suitably incorporated in the form of
guidelines, for future implementation; the Registrar General shall take appropriate
action to place the papers before the Hon†ble Chief Justice, in this regard. The writ
petition is disposed of in the above terms without order on costs.” RIVAL
CONTENTIONS
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
14

10. The substance of the principal submissions made on behalf of the appellant in
challenge to the order so passed by the High Court has been as follows:
10.1. The learned senior counsel for the appellant has argued that right to be considered for
promotion is a fundamental right and the exercise of this fundamental right requires that an
employee is given a free, fair and reasonable opportunity to be considered for such promotion. The
main plank of the submissions of learned counsel for the appellant has been that only in the year
2009, the respondent establishment provided for the criteria on which a candidate was to be
considered for promotion as a District and Sessions Judge/Principal Judge, Family Court but
retrospective application of such criteria on the individuals like the appellant negates their
fundamental right to be duly considered for promotion. 10.2. The learned senior counsel has
emphatically argued that the said change in criteria was never communicated to the appellant nor
was notified so as to make the candidate likely to be affected by such change aware about the
requirements. According to the learned counsel, the so- called “general awareness” and “deemed
knowledge” does not establish that all concerned were aware of the newly incorporated criteria and
the lack of communication is in violation of principle of natural justice. 10.3. The learned senior
counsel would submit that when the changes are made retrospectively and the right to promotion is
denied, the procedure cannot be said to be just and fair. The learned counsel has argued that any
change in the method of promotion ought to be prospective in its application and ought to be
specifically communicated to the candidate concerned. While relying on the decisions in State of
U.P. v. Mahesh Narain : (2013) 4 SCC 169 and Nirmal Chandra Bhattachargee & Ors. v. Union of
India & Ors.: 1991 Supp (2) SCC 363, the learned counsel has contended that in the similar fact
situation, this Court has held that the change of service rules cannot be made to the prejudice of an
employee who was in service prior to such change. According to the learned counsel, creation of new
criteria for promotion amounts to a change in service rules and such an alteration cannot be given
retrospective effect if it operates to the prejudice of the employee who was in service before such
change and this cannot be done even in exercise of the so-called residuary powers. 10.4. The learned
senior counsel would further submit that even when changes of reasonable nature can be made in
the matter of promotion, the changes themselves should be made only in a reasonable manner with
due notice to the people likely to be affected, which having not been done in the present case, the
impugned operation of changed criteria cannot be countenanced. The learned counsel contended
that when the petitioner joined the service and even thereafter the existing criteria for promotion to
the post of District Judge as also for consideration to be elevated to the High Court had consistently
been of the candidate having ‘B+’ grade and the appellant fulfilling such criteria, ought to have been
promoted to the cadre of District Judge.
10.5. The learned senior counsel has further submitted that in the case of Dev Dutt (supra), this
Court has specifically held that nomenclature is not important but the effect of an entry in the ACR
would determine if it is an adverse one or not. The learned counsel would submit that in the present
case, though the appellant was given her ACR gradings but she was unaware that after 2009, such
gradings would be operating adverse against her pursuant to the new criteria and the effect of want
of communication of change in service conditions and rules has operated detrimental to her
candidature for promotion.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
15

10.6. The learned senior counsel has further submitted that even as on date, no objective criteria
exists for evaluating a judicial officer and marking of the grading is only on the subjective
satisfaction of the authority concerned. The learned counsel would submit that while only the
overall ACR gradings are communicated but the point-wise grading is not communicated, which
hinders the ability of a judicial officer to appreciate any weak point or to effectively appeal against
any unfair or adverse grading. With reference to the last part of the impugned order, learned counsel
has contended that admittedly, no uniform system existed for evaluating a judicial officer and, in the
given scenario, any grading based on unknown criteria could only be treated as arbitrary and the
promotion criteria based thereon cannot be approved.
11. The counter-submissions on behalf of the contesting respondent could also be briefly taken note
of as follows:
11.1. The learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has submitted that the posts of District
and Sessions Judge and the Principal Judge, Family Court are selection posts to
which, appointments are to be made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and
therefore, the appellant cannot claim appointment thereto as a matter of right. The
learned counsel has referred to the facts that prior to the year 2008, there was only
one sanctioned post of District Judge under the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules,
1970 but later on, the National Capital Territory of Delhi was bifurcated into 9 Civil
Districts with effect from 01.11.2008; and that pursuant to such bifurcation, the
strength of District and Sessions Judges was increased to 11. The learned counsel has
referred to the aforementioned resolutions by the Full Court with the submissions
that prior to the year 2009, there was no criteria laid down by the High Court for
selecting candidates for appointment to the post of District Judge but, given the
requirement of laying down standards for such selection, the said resolutions were
adopted and implemented while keeping in view Rule 27 of the Rules of 1970 and the
norms prescribed by the Government of India under OM dated 15.02.2008 for the
posts having the pay scale equivalent to that of a District Judge. 11.2. With reference
to Article 233(1) of the Constitution of India, the learned counsel would submit that
the power to appoint District Judges lies strictly with the High Court and it was in
exercise of such powers that the High Court laid down the criteria in question for
selection of the most meritorious among the eligible candidates. While reiterating the
submissions that appointment to the posts in question is purely on merit-
cum–security basis, the learned counsel has argued, with reference to several of the decisions,
including those in Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha and Anr. v. Dr. K.
Santhakumari: (2001) 5 SCC 60 and Haryana State Electronics Development Corporation Limited
and Ors. v. Seema Sharma and Ors.: (2009) 7 SCC 311, that in appointments on the basis of
merit-cum-seniority, the merit acquires primacy and seniority becomes relevant only when all the
aspects of merit qualifications are equal. The learned counsel has contended that the appellant was
also duly considered for such appointment but only those candidates were appointed who were
more meritorious than her, like the respondent Nos. 3 to 10. 11.3. As regards the question of
knowledge of the appellant regarding the criteria in question, the learned counsel has argued that
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
16

the criteria adopted by the High Court had been the same as prescribed by the Government of India
in OM dated 18.02.2008 and, by virtue of Rule 27 of the Rules of 1970, the appellant shall be
deemed to be having knowledge of the same; and even her contemporaneous colleagues had
conducted themselves in accordance with the requirements of such criteria. The learned counsel has
also referred to the representations made by the Associations of the officers and has contended that
it cannot be suggested by the appellant that the concerned judicial officers were not having
knowledge of adoption of the criteria mentioned in the impugned resolutions.
11.4. The learned counsel has distinguished the decision of this Court in the case of Mahesh Narain
(supra) with the submissions that therein, this Court has held that an employee cannot be precluded
from enjoying the benefit of a provision for promotion which was amended after he became eligible
for being promoted. The learned counsel would submit that in the present case, the High Court did
not change the eligibility criteria for appointment of District Judge and by the impugned
resolutions, merely evolved a selection criteria for evaluation of eligible candidates; and in any case,
the appellant entered the zone of consideration only in the year 2014- 15 whereas, the said criteria in
question had been implemented for appointments made from the year 2012 onwards. Similarly, the
learned counsel has distinguished the decision in Nirmal Chandra (supra) with the submissions that
the fact situation therein was entirely different where due to restructuring, Class D employees were
placed in Class C without change of their status and they were sought to be denied the benefit of
promotion to a post in Class C for which, this Court held that such promotion could not be denied to
the persons who became eligible for promotion prior to the restructuring; and the impact of
restructuring could not prejudice the employees.
11.5. As regards the decision in Dev Dutt (supra), the learned counsel has contended that the
reliance thereupon was entirely misplaced because the appellant was admittedly informed of all her
ACRs; and she rather accepted most of her ACRs for the period 2010 to 2014 without any protest
and did not pursue any case for upgradation of the same; and it is evident that she was never
dissatisfied with her grading in the relevant ACRs as ‘B+’.
11.6. Put in a nutshell, the submissions on behalf of the contesting respondent have been that the
appellant is not entitled to any relief because all the candidates recommended for promotion had
better ACR gradings than the appellant.
12. We have bestowed anxious consideration to the rival submissions and have perused the material
placed on record with reference to the law applicable.
13. In view of the submissions made, two points mainly arise for determination in this case: (1) As to
whether the appellant has been denied fair and reasonable consideration of her case for promotion
to the posts of District and Sessions Judge/ Principal Judge, Family Court by operation of the
criteria laid down in the impugned resolutions; and (2) As to whether the appellant suffered any
prejudice in the matter of ACR gradings? RE: POINT NUMBER (1)
14. As noticed, the principal grievance of the appellant is that she has been denied fair and
reasonable consideration of her case for promotion. It has been contended on behalf of the appellant
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
17

that the respondent High Court evolved new criteria for promotion to the posts of District and
Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court by way of the impugned resolutions but the same
was not notified and she was not made aware of the new criteria that required ‘A’ gradings in the
ACRs of five years preceding the base year of consideration. It has also been contended on behalf of
the appellant that the respondent High Court had acted illegally and unfairly in putting the new
criteria in operation with retrospective effect that has caused her serious prejudice. An ancillary
aspect has also been put into contention that the High Court had not been right in fixing the criteria
for promotion of the judicial officers on the basis of the norms applicable to the executive officers
while disregarding the law that the members of other services cannot be placed at par with the
members of the judiciary.
15. In order to examine as to whether the appellant has been able to make out a valid case of legal
grievance, a brief reference to the basic legal provisions and principles having application to the case
at hand shall be apposite.
15.1. It does not require any elaborate discussion to say that the right to be considered for promotion
is a fundamental right of equality of opportunity in the matter of employment. The wide variety of
case-law on the subject need not be recounted but, for ready reference, it appears appropriate to
refer to the decision in Ajit Singh and Ors. (II) v. State of Punjab and Ors.: (1999) 7 SCC 209
wherein a Constitution Bench of this Court reaffirmed the basics of such fundamental right and also
pointed out the silhouettes of the criteria relating to promotional avenues in the following: – “22.
Article 14 and Article 16(1) are closely connected. They deal with individual rights of the person.
Article 14 demands that the "State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws". Article 16(1) issues a positive command that "there shall be equality of
opportunity for all citizens in the matters relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State". It has been held repeatedly by this Court that Sub-clause (1) of Article 16 is a facet
of Article 14 and that -it takes its roots from Article 14. The said Sub-clause particularizes the
generality in Article 14 and identifies, in a constitutional sense "equality of opportunity" in matters
of employment and appointment to any office under the State. The word 'employment' being wider,
there is no dispute that it takes within its fold, the aspect of promotions to posts above the stage of
initial level of recruitment. Article 16(1) provides to every employee otherwise eligible for promotion
or who comes within the zone of consideration, a fundamental right to be "considered" for
promotion. Equal opportunity here means the right to be "considered" for promotion. If a person
satisfies the eligibility and zone criteria but is not considered for promotion, then there will be a
clear infraction of his fundamental right to be "considered" for promotion, which is his personal
right.
23. Where promotional avenues are available, seniority becomes closely interlinked with promotion
provided such a promotion is made after complying with the principle of equal opportunity stated in
Article 16(1). For example, if the promotion is by rule of seniority-cum-suitability', the eligible
seniors at the basic level as per seniority fixed at that level and who are within the zone of
consideration must be first considered for promotion and be promoted if found suitable. In the
promoted category they would have to count their seniority from the date of such promotion
because they get promotion through a process of equal opportunity. Similarly, if the promotion from
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
18

the basic level is by selection or merit or any rule involving consideration of merit, the senior who is
eligible at the basic level has to be considered and if found meritorious in comparison with others,
he will have to be promoted first. If he is not found so meritorious, the next in order of seniority is to
be considered and if found eligible and more meritorious than the first person in the seniority list,
he should be promoted. In either case, the person who is first promoted will normally count his
seniority from the date of such promotion. (There are minor modifications in various services in the
matter of counting of seniority of such promotees but in all cases the senior most person at the basic
level is to be considered first and then the others in the line of seniority). That is how right to be
considered for promotion and the 'seniority' attached to such promotion become important facets of
the fundamental right guaranteed in Article 16(1).” (underlining supplied) 15.2. The criteria in
question, for promotion to the post of District and Sessions Judge and equivalent, had been evolved
and operated by the High Court in the purported exercise of its powers under the Rules of 1970. The
fundamentals of law also remain settled that the power of appointment, posting and promotion of
District Judges vests with the Governor of the State, but this power has to be exercised in
consultation with the High Court concerned; and this Court has laid down in no uncertain terms
that in such matters, the primacy is to be given to the views of High Court. Again, instead
multiplying the authorities, suffice would be to refer to the decision in the case of
Chandramouleshwar Prasad (supra) wherein a Constitution Bench of this Court exposited the
principles underlying Article 233 of the Constitution of India7 and observed, inter alia, as under: –
“….No doubt the appointment of a person to be a District Judge rests with the Governor but he
cannot make the appointment on his own initiative and must do so in consultation with the High
Court. The underlying idea of the Article is that the Governor should make up his mind after there
has been a deliberation with the High Court. The High Court is the body which is intimately familiar
with the 7 Article 233 (1) reads as under:-
“233. Appointment of district judges.—(1) Appointments of persons to be, and the
posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor
of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to
such State.” efficiency and quality of officers who are fit to be promoted as District
Judges. The High Court alone knows their merits as also demerits. This does not
mean that the Governor must accept whatever advice is given by the High Court but
the Article does require that the Governor should obtain from the High Court its
views on the merits or demerits of persons among whom the choice of promotion is
to be limited. If the High Court recommends A while the Governor is of opinion that
B's claim is superior to A's it is incumbent on the Governor to consult the High Court
with regard to its proposal to appoint B and not A. If the Governor is to appoint B
without getting the views of the High Court about B's claim vis-a-vis A's Lo
promotion, B's appointment cannot be said to be in compliance with Article 233 of
the Constitution. ….. …. So far as promotion of officers to the cadre of District Judges
is concerned the High Court is best fitted to adjudge the claims and merits of persons
to be considered for promotion. The Governor cannot discharge his function under
Article 233 if he makes an appointment of a person without ascertaining the High
Court's views in regard thereto…………” 15.3. While keeping the aforesaid principles
in view, we may now examine the scheme of the Rules of 1970. As noticed, two
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
19

channels of recruitment to the posts in the cadre of District Judge have been
provided: one by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division) and
another by direct recruitment from the eligible persons. As regards promotion, the
bifurcation is provided in the manner that 65% are to be recruited by way of
promotion on the basis of merit–cum–seniority and 10% by promotion strictly on the
basis of merit through limited competitive examination (vide Rule 7 and 7A). Even in
the matters relating to pay scales, it is noticed that granting of Selection Grade and
Super Time Scale is on the assessment of merit–cum–seniority (vide Rule 18). The
matter in issue in the present appeal relates to promotion to the posts of District and
Sessions Judge or Principal Judge, Family Court within the cadre of DHJS.
Apparently, no separate provision is found in the Rules of 1970 as regards such
upward progression within the cadre and obviously, for such a matter, the residuary
provision as contained in Rule 27 comes into operation by virtue of which, the
directions or orders for the time being in force and applicable to the officers of
comparable status in IAS would apply. 15.3.1 At this juncture, we may observe that
the appellant had attempted to question the said Rule 27 of the Rules of 1970 as being
ultra vires, particularly with reference to the decision of this Court in the case of All
India Judges Association (supra). In our view, the High Court has rightly rejected
such a challenge to Rule 27 because this residuary clause in the Rules of 1970 does
not appear offending the law declared by this Court in any manner. This residuary
clause is not of equating the judicial officers with the executive officers but only
provides that in regard to the matters for which no provision or insufficient provision
has been made in the Rules of 1970, the relevant rules, directions or orders as
applicable to IAS shall regulate the conditions of service of the officers of DHJS. A
perusal of the other provisions in the Rules of 1970 makes it clear that reference to
the service conditions of the members of IAS is not an anathema to these rules and,
on the contrary, wherever necessary, the applicable rules, orders or directions
concerning the members of IAS do govern the service conditions of the judicial
officers too. For example, in the matter of pay fixation of a promoted officer, it is
provided in Rule 20 that such pay shall be fixed in the referred time scale in
accordance with the financial rules, regulations et cetera, as applicable from time to
time to the members of IAS; and as per Rule 26, the direct recruits are required to
produce before appointment, a certificate of physical fitness in accordance with the
standards prescribed for IAS. Such provisions, essentially meant for proper
regulation of the service, by themselves, do not put the members of DHJS at par with
the members of IAS for all purposes. Moreover, as noticed, what the High Court
establishment has provided by way of the impugned resolutions are the norms for
promotion while taking cue from the norms applicable to the members of IAS in the
equivalent pay scale. Providing for such norms does not in any manner stand at
conflict with the principles laid down in the case of All India Judges Association
(supra). The challenge to the said Rule 27 has rightly been rejected by the High Court.
15.4. It would now be appropriate to take note of the principles governing the
exercise of promotion, particularly the norms and criteria for promotion. 15.4.1. As
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
20

noticed, in the case of Ajit Singh (supra), even while holding that the right to be
considered for promotion is a fundamental right, the Constitution Bench pointed out
the subtle distinction in the operation of the norms of seniority on one hand and any
rule requiring consideration of merit on the other while observing, inter alia, that ‘if
the promotion from the basic level is by selection or merit or any rule involving
consideration of merit, the senior who is eligible at the basic level has to be
considered and if found meritorious in comparison with others, he will have to be
promoted first. If he is not found so meritorious, the next in order of seniority is to be
considered and if found eligible and more meritorious than the first person in the
seniority list, he should be promoted.’ 15.4.2. In Central Council for Research (supra),
this Court further elaborated on the relevant principles, particularly with reference to
the role of merit in relation to the higher posts while observing, inter alia, as under:-
“6. The principle of merit-cum-seniority is an approved method of selection and this
Court in Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan: AIR 1967 SC 1910 held that
promotion to “selection grade posts” is not automatic on the basis of ranking in the
gradation list and the promotion is primarily based on merit and not on seniority
alone. At p. 1914 of the judgment, it is stated as under: (AIR para 6) “The
circumstance that these posts are classed as ‘selection grade posts’ itself suggests that
promotion to these posts is not automatic being made only on the basis of ranking in
the gradation list but the question of merit enters in promotion to selection posts. In
our opinion, the respondents are right in their contention that the ranking or position
in the gradation list does not confer any right on the petitioner to be promoted to
selection post and that it is a well-established rule that promotion to selection grades
or selection posts is to be based primarily on merit and not on seniority alone. The
principle is that when the claims of officers to selection posts is under consideration,
seniority should not be regarded except where the merit of the officers is judged to be
equal and no other criterion is, therefore, available.”
7. The Court further held that such mode of selection is not violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution.
8. In State of Orissa v. Durga Charan Das: AIR 1966 SC 1547 the Constitution Bench
of this Court held that the promotion to a selection post is not a matter of right which
can be claimed merely by seniority.
9. In Union of India v. Mohan Lal Capoor: (1973)2 SCC 8363 (SCC at p. 856, para 37)
it was held as under:
“[F]or inclusion in the list, merit and suitability in all respects should be the
governing consideration and that seniority should play only a secondary role. It is
only when merit and suitability are roughly equal that seniority will be a determining
factor, or, if it is not fairly possible to make an assessment inter se of the merit and
suitability of two eligible candidates and come to a firm conclusion, seniority would
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
21

tilt the scale.”
10. In B.V. Sivaiah v. K. Addanki Babu: (1998) 6 SCC 720 this Court held that the
principle of “merit-cum-seniority” lays greater emphasis on merit and ability and
seniority plays a less significant role. Seniority is to be given weight only when merit
and ability are approximately equal.” 15.4.3. In Haryana State Electronics (supra),
this Court again pointed out the root distinction in the principles of
merit-cum-seniority and seniority-cum-
merit in the following:-
“7. The Court is of the opinion that the principle of merit-cum- seniority and that of
seniority-cum-merit are two totally different principles.
8. The principle of merit-cum-seniority puts greater emphasis on merit and ability and where
promotion is governed by this principle seniority plays a less significant role. However, seniority is
to be given weightage when merit and ability more or less are equal among the candidates who are
to be promoted.
9. On the other hand, insofar as the principle of seniority- cum-merit is concerned it gives greater
importance to seniority and promotion to a senior person cannot be denied unless the person
concerned is found totally unfit on merit to discharge the duties of the higher post. The totality of
the service of the employee has to be considered for promotion on the basis of
seniority-cum-merit….”
16. Keeping the principles aforesaid in view, when we revert to the scheme of the Rules of 1970, the
striking feature is that even at the entry level, the promotions are to be made either on
merit-cum-seniority basis8 or 8 As per clause (a) of Rule 7(1) and Rule 7A of the Rules of 1970 on
merit basis9. Further, grant of Selection Grade and Super Time Scale is also on assessment of
merit–cum–seniority10. In the given scheme of the Rules of 1970, it is difficult to countenance any
suggestion that in DHJS, merit could be forsaken at any level or only seniority be given primacy in
the matter relating to upward progression to the higher posts of District and Sessions Judge or
Principal Judge, Family Court. Rather, looking to the nature of posts, in every higher progression,
merit would play a major role and would, perforce, acquire primacy.
17. We may also recapitulate a few basic features relating to the impugned resolutions. As per the
facts available on record, prior to the year 2008, there was only one sanctioned post of District
Judge under the Rules of 1970. Later on, the National Capital Territory of Delhi came to be
bifurcated into 9 Civil Districts and the bifurcation came into effect from 01.11.2008 by virtue of the
notification dated 22.10.2008; and in view of such bifurcation, the strength of District and Sessions
Judges was increased to 11. This reorganisation and increase of strength of the cadre of DHJS,
obviously, led to the requirement of providing the norms and criteria for promotion to the posts of
District and Sessions Judges and equivalent because no such norms and criteria were in existence.
In keeping with such requirements, the High Court, in its Full Court meeting dated 28.04.2009,
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
22

adopted a resolution to the effect that, for the purpose of being selected/promoted as District and
Sessions Judge, a candidate of 9 As per clause (b) of Rule 7(1) of the Rules of 1970 10 As per Rule 18
of the Rules of 1970 DHJS ought to fulfil the criteria of possessing at least two ‘A’ (very good) and
three ‘B+’ (good) ACR gradings for the preceding five years from the date of consideration for such
appointment. Thereafter, in its Full Court meeting dated 15.01.2010, the High Court proceeded to
modify the aforesaid criteria to the effect that for being promoted as District and Sessions Judge, a
candidate of DHJS ought to possess the minimum ‘A’ (very good) grading in ACRs of each of the five
years under consideration. It had been the case of the respondent High Court that such criteria were
adopted as being equivalent to the revised promotion criteria in the Indian Administrative Services
by virtue of the residuary provision contained in Rule 27 ibid. As against the aforesaid resolution
dated 15.01.2010, the High Court received certain representations, including those from the
Associations of the Officers and, upon consideration of these representations, a committee
comprising of four Hon’ble Judges, in its report dated 08.10.2010, recommended for
implementation of the revised criteria in a phased manner; and such recommendations of the
committee were accepted by the Full Court of the High Court on 27.01.2011. In this manner
aforesaid, the respondent High Court took the decision to implement the revised criteria envisaged
by the resolution dated 15.01.2010 in a phased manner; and the requirements came to be provided
that for appointment to the post of District and Sessions Judge, a candidate should, in the five years
preceding the base year, carry the ACR gradings as follows:
(i) for the year 2009, at least two ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining three ‘B+’ (good);
(ii) for the year 2010, at least three ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining two ‘B+’ (good);
(iii) for the year 2011, at least four ‘A’ (very good) and the remaining one ‘B+’ (good);
and
(iv) for the year 2012 and onwards, a minimum of five ‘A’ (very good).
Further, the Administrative and General Supervision Committee of the High Court, in its meeting
dated 13.09.2013, resolved, inter alia, that the post of Principal Judge, Family Court being
equivalent to that of District and Sessions Judge, the same criteria be also adopted for appointment
of Principal Judge, Family Court.
17.1. In an overall comprehension of the matter, we have no hesitation in endorsing the views of the
High Court in the impugned order that the no- norms position for upward progression in DHJS, as
existing prior to the year 2009, could not have been continued with reorganisation of the District
Courts and certain norms, commensurate with the posts in question, were required to be provided;
and were accordingly provided with reference to the prescriptions for the officers of IAS in the
equivalent pay scales. It has been asserted on behalf of the contesting respondent, and remains
indisputable, that for the officers of such equivalent pay scales, the requirement had been of five
“very good” ACR gradings (i.e., ‘A’ grading) for five years preceding the date of consideration for
higher positions. The High Court establishment had further been reasonable and balanced in its
approach when such threshold requirement of five “very good” ACR gradings was not foisted on the
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
23

officers immediately and, in keeping with the position obtainable in the past as also keeping in view
the merit requirements, took a considered decision after examining the representations that such
criteria be implemented gradually and started with the norms of two “very good” with three “good”
ACR gradings for the year 2009 and systematically enhanced the norms to three “very good” with
two “good” ACR gradings for the year 2010; four “very good” with one “good” ACR gradings for the
year 2011; and eventually provided for five “very good” ACR gradings for the year 2012 and
onwards.
17.2. In the given fact situation and the methodology of gradual implementation adopted by the
High Court, the suggestion on the part of the appellant that there had been any so-called
retrospective operation of revised criteria remains totally bereft of substance and could only be
rejected.
18. Turning now to the main plank of the submissions on behalf of the appellant that she was not
made aware of such so-called revised criteria, in our view, such submissions carry several
shortcomings of their own. As noticed, the appellant joined DHJS in the year 2002 and eventually
stood second in rank in her batch. She was confirmed with effect from 25.11.2004. She was, and
would always be presumed to be, aware of all the requirements of the Rules of 1970. Moreover, the
appellant, a member of DHJS, cannot suggest that she remained oblivious of the developments
about creation of 9 Civil Districts in the year 2008 and increase in the strength of District and
Sessions Judges to 11. The appellant was also aware of the fact that no specific provision was
available in the Rules of 1970 as regards upward progression in DHJS, particularly to the posts of
District and Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court and hence, by virtue of Rule 27 of the
Rules of 1970, she would be deemed to be having constructive knowledge that the criteria to be
adopted for such upward progression would be that as applicable for the equivalent posts in IAS.
The Office Memorandum dated 18.02.2008 issued by the Government of India in its Ministry of
Personnel, Public grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) has been placed
on record by the contesting respondent and it is not the case of the appellant that she was not aware
of this Office Memorandum issued by the Government of India 11. When it had consistently been
provided that for promotion to the scale of Rs. 18,400 – 22,400 and above, the prescribed
benchmark of “very good” ought to be met in all ACRs of five years under consideration; and when
the higher posts of District and Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court do carry much
higher scales of pay (vide Rule 18 ibid.), neither the 11 In the said OM, it had, inter alia, been
provided that, – “…in order to ensure greater selectivity at higher level of administration, the DPC
may ensure that for the promotion to the scale of Rs.18,400–22,400 and above, the prescribed
benchmark of ‘Very Good’ is invariably met in all ACR's of five years under consideration…” High
Court could be faulted in applying the same benchmark for such higher posts in DHJS nor the
appellant could feign ignorance about the same. 18.1. Apart from the above, it is noteworthy that in
the Rules of 1970, even the entry level promotion to the post in DHJS is on the basis of merit-cum-
seniority or merit. Viewed in the light of such requirements, it goes without saying that any upward
progression in DHJS could only be on the higher requirements of merit and in any case, such
requirements cannot be lesser than the requirements at entry level. In this view of the matter too,
the appellant was conscious of the fact that for upward movement in DHJS, merit would acquire
primacy; and that seniority alone was not going to be decisive for promotion to the higher posts of
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
24

District and Sessions Judge and the Principal Judge, Family Court. Although there is no
requirement in law that criteria for promotion based on ACR alone be also notified but, in any case,
in the scheme of the rules and the requirements of the posts in question, the appellant cannot
contend that she was not aware of the position that comparative merit of the incumbents shall be a
crucial factor for any upward progression in the cadre.
18.2. It is also noteworthy that when from the year 2009, such exercise was undertaken by the High
Court establishment to lay down proper norms and criteria for upward progression in DHJS, both
the Associations of the judicial officers namely, Delhi Higher Judicial Service Officers Association as
also Delhi Judicial Service Officers Association, made representations after the Full Court meeting
dated 15.01.2010 and gradual implementation of the criteria was provided after due consideration of
the said representations. It is not the case of the appellant that she is not a member of the
Association of DHJS officers.
18.3. Viewed from any angle, it is but apparent that the appellant was aware of, and shall always be
deemed to be conscious of, the requirement that any promotion to the post of District and Sessions
Judge or Principal Judge, Family Court would only be on the basis of such norms where merit would
be a crucial factor and seniority alone would not suffice. It follows as a necessary corollary that the
appellant was also conscious of the position that while making any such promotion, the assessment
would be based on the competitive merit of the candidates in the zone of consideration; and if any
candidate in such zone of consideration was possessed of better merit than herself, he would be
preferred for promotion.
19. Coming now to the operation of the criteria in question, we are clearly of the view that providing
for the norms for assessment of the comparative merits of the candidates in the zone of
consideration, was squarely within the domain of the High Court; and infringement of the right of
consideration could only be suggested if different yardsticks or different norms were provided and
applied qua the similarly circumstanced persons. However, this is not the case of the appellant nor it
could be so because the High Court has apparently taken up all the persons in the zone of
consideration at the relevant time and has accorded promotion on the basis of comparative merit of
the candidates. The appellant, when could not stand in such competitive merit position, cannot raise
a complaint about infringement of any of her legal rights. It is not the case of the appellant that
anybody junior to her and standing equal in merit or anybody not fulfilling the criteria laid down by
the High Court has been promoted. 19.1. Though, in all fairness, the appellant has not attempted to
question the reasonableness of the criteria as provided by the High Court but, having regard to the
issues raised, we feel inclined to observe that looking to the duties and responsibilities attached with
the higher posts of District and Sessions Judge and Principal Judge, Family Court, the High Court
cannot be faulted in providing for a reasonable method of assessment of the requisite merit in the
manner that a candidate in the zone of consideration ought to be possessing minimum five “very
good” ACRs in the preceding five years from the base year. As already noticed, in fact, the criteria so
adopted had been the identical one as provided for the members of IAS in the equivalent pay scales.
20. Therefore, the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant about non-communication of the
criteria for promotion turn out to be totally meritless and the grievance as suggested on behalf of the
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
25

appellant cannot be considered to be a legal grievance.
21. From the material placed on record, it is also apparent that the case of the appellant was duly
considered for such promotion along with the other incumbents but herself and a few others were
not promoted for not fulfilling the criteria as provided in the impugned resolutions. The fact that the
case of the appellant was also duly considered is amply borne out from the minutes of the Full Court
meetings, including those of the meeting dated 09.01.2015 , 16.04.2015, 19.09.2015 and 28.11.2016
(the relevant parts of two such resolutions dated 09.01.2015 and 28.11.2016 have been extracted in
paragraphs 5.6.1 and 5.6.2 hereinabove). Therefore, the appellant cannot raise a grievance that the
respondent establishment has not accorded due consideration to her case for promotion. As noticed,
case of the appellant was duly considered but she could not be promoted for not possessing the
requisite gradings in her ACRs of the relevant period.
22. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present case, the decisions in the cases of
Mahesh Narain and Nirmal Chandra Bhattacharjeee (supra) are of no avail to the appellant because
the fact situation of the said cases were entirely different and this Court held that an employee
cannot be denied the benefit of a provision for promotion which was amended after he became
eligible for being promoted. In the present case, the High Court did not change the eligibility criteria
for appointment to the post of District and Session Judge or Principal Judge, Family Court but
merely evolved a selection criteria for evaluation of eligible candidates. There had not been any
denial of a pre-existing right of the appellant, who entered the zone of consideration only in the year
2014-15 whereas, the criteria in question was implemented for the appointments made from the
year 2012.
23. For what has been discussed hereinabove, we are clearly of the view that the appellant has not
been denied fair and reasonable consideration of her case for promotion to the posts of District and
Sessions Judge/ Principal Judge, Family Court by operation of the criteria laid down in the
impugned resolutions. Point number (1) is, accordingly, answered against the appellant.
RE: POINT NUMBER (2)
24. It has been argued on behalf of the appellant that though the questioned criteria came to be
provided by way of the impugned resolutions and the same were sought to be implemented in a
phased manner, but there existed no objective basis for evaluating a candidate before assigning any
particular grading in ACR; and this fact is highlighted in the impugned order itself where the Court
has recognised the fact that there was no uniform set of rules and guidelines for the appraisal
committees to follow and proceeded to lay down certain norms and guidelines in that regard.
Therefore, and while seeking strength from such observations in the impugned order, it has been
contended that deep lacuna in the system left a wide vacuum in implementation of the new
benchmark provided by the impugned resolutions without any means of representation for the
eligible candidates like the appellant, who were otherwise suitable and eligible for being considered
for promotion. The decision of this Court in the case of Dev Dutt (supra) has also been referred on
behalf of the appellant. As noticed, it had also been the submission on behalf of the appellant that
she was prejudiced for not being provided with the point-wise gradation and also for having not
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
26

been provided with the gradings of the other officers who were junior to herself and who were given
the promotion. In our view, the submissions remain totally meritless and it cannot be said that the
contesting respondent has caused any prejudice to the appellant in the matter of ACR gradings.
25. The fundamental requirement in law for communication of every entry in ACR to the employee
concerned, as settled in the case of Dev Dutt (supra) and reaffirmed in the case of Sukhdev Singh v.
Union of India:
(2013) 9 SCC 566, is neither of any doubt nor of any dispute. The law declared in the
case of Dev Dutt (supra), as referred on behalf of the appellant, could be usefully
noticed as under: – “9. In the present case the benchmark (i.e. the essential
requirement) laid down by the authorities for promotion to the post of
Superintending Engineer was that the candidate should have “very good” entry for
the last five years. Thus in this situation the “good” entry in fact is an adverse entry
because it eliminates the candidate from being considered for promotion. Thus,
nomenclature is not relevant, it is the effect which the entry is having which
determines whether it is an adverse entry or not. It is thus the rigours of the entry
which is important, not the phraseology. The grant of a “good” entry is of no
satisfaction to the incumbent if it in fact makes him ineligible for promotion or has an
adverse effect on his chances.
*** *** ***
17. In our opinion, every entry in the ACR of a public servant must be communicated
to him within a reasonable period, whether it is a poor, fair, average, good or very
good entry.
This is because non-communication of such an entry may adversely affect the employee in two ways:
(1) had the entry been communicated to him he would know about the assessment of his work and
conduct by his superiors, which would enable him to improve his work in future; (2) he would have
an opportunity of making a representation against the entry if he feels it is unjustified, and pray for
its upgradation. Hence, non-communication of an entry is arbitrary, and it has been held by the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India: (1978) 1 SCC 248
that arbitrariness violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
18. Thus, it is not only when there is a benchmark but in all cases that an entry (whether it is poor,
fair, average, good or very good) must be communicated to a public servant, otherwise there is
violation of the principle of fairness, which is the soul of natural justice. Even an outstanding entry
should be communicated since that would boost the morale of the employee and make him work
harder.
*** *** ***
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
27

41. In our opinion, non-communication of entries in the annual confidential report of a public
servant, whether he is in civil, judicial, police or any other service (other than the military), certainly
has civil consequences because it may affect his chances for promotion or get other benefits (as
already discussed above). Hence, such non-communication would be arbitrary, and as such violative
of Article 14 of the Constitution.” 25.1. In our view, reference to the aforesaid principles remains
totally misplaced in the fact situation of the present case. It is not in dispute that the appellant was,
in fact, informed of every grading made in her ACR. She was awarded ‘B+’ (good) in the years 2010,
2011, 2012 and 2013; and ‘A’ (very good) in the year 2014. From the material placed on record, it
appears that the appellant never challenged her gradings for any year except that for the year 2011
when she requested for upgradation of her ACR grading from ‘B’ to ‘B+’ or ‘A’; and the High Court,
acceding to her request, upgraded her ACR to ‘B+’. As noticed, the impugned resolution dated
27.01.2011 came to be adopted after due consideration of the representations made to the High
Court and in conformity with the criteria provided by the Government of India for the posts
equivalent in scale to that of District Judges. However, the criteria of having ‘A’ (very good) grading
in the preceding five years was implemented in a phased manner, as already noticed hereinbefore.
The appellant, not being oblivious of the position that for any upward progression in DHJS,
comparative merit would be a key factor, chose to remain contented with her grading at ‘B+’ in the
relevant years and did not question the same at the appropriate time and in appropriate manner.
That being the position, the appellant cannot be acceded the right to contend now and at this stage
that the ACR gradings have operated adverse to her. The requirements of the decision in Dev Dutt
(supra) were duly met with communication of ACR gradings to the appellant.
26. Having regard to the circumstances of this case, we are impelled to observe that while raising
grievance with regard to the impact and effect of ACR gradings, the appellant appears to have
missed out the fundamental factor that for the promotions in question, an individual’s minimum
merit, by itself, was not going to be decisive; but the relevant factor was going to be comparative
merit of the persons in the zone of consideration. That being the position, when the persons in zone
of consideration possessing ‘A’ (very good) grading have been promoted in preference to her, the
appellant cannot raise a grievance about her gradings after such promotions.
27. The other contention as on behalf of the appellant that only the overall ACR grading was
communicated but not the point-wise grading or criteria for grading, again, does not advance the
cause of the appellant in any manner. As noticed, the appellant did not challenge her ‘B+’ gradings
in the years 2010, 2012 and 2013. She was awarded ‘B’ grading in the year 2011 and upon her
representation, the same was upgraded to ‘B+’. When the appellant had not otherwise challenged
her ‘B+’ gradings for the years under consideration, she would not be entitled to raise any question
on the process or criteria for such award of gradings. Even otherwise, the appellant has failed to
show any legal requirement on the respondent establishment to supply to her anything other than
the overall grading. Another feeble suggestion on behalf of the appellant, as noticed in the impugned
order by the High Court, about want of knowledge of gradings of other officers has rightly not been
pressed before us. The grading of an individual officer remains a matter between the officer and the
establishment and any other officer cannot claim to be informed about the grading of any other
officer as a matter of right.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
28

28. On behalf of the appellant, however, a substantial emphasis has been put on the observation
made in the impugned order on the requirement of uniform norms for awarding of the grades in
ACR; and it has been contended that no objective criteria existed for evaluating an officer. These
submissions are also sans merit and do not in any manner advance the cause of the appellant in the
present case. This is for the simple reason that the system and method for awarding of the grades in
ACR at the relevant time was equally applicable to all the judicial officers; and the gradings, not only
of the appellant but of all other officers too, were made by way of the same methodology. Therein
too, as noticed, the judicial officers’ work and performance was supervised and graded by the
committees comprising of three Hon’ble Judges and ultimately, the gradings were finalised by the
Full Court. In the impugned order also, the High Court found such system to be a merited one but
indicated the want of uniform set of rules or guidelines for all the appraisal committees to follow;
and thereafter proceeded to lay down certain norms to be kept in view by the evaluation authorities.
The observations by the High Court, essentially meant for improvement of the system with uniform
set of guidelines, do not nullify the effect of the ACRs already marked by the existing system. The
guidelines indicated by the High Court in the order impugned could only be construed as being
meant for future implementation. Nothing turns upon such observations in relation to the case of
the appellant.
29. For what has been discussed hereinabove, we are clearly of the view that the appellant has not
been able to establish that she had suffered any prejudice in the matter of ACR gradings. Point
number (2) is also, accordingly, answered against the appellant.
30. The discussion and findings aforesaid are sufficient to dispose of this appeal but before
concluding, we deem it necessary to point out that at the conclusion of the hearing of this matter,
the appellant, who was present in the Court to assist the arguing counsel, made the submissions
before us, with permission, that she had been a hard working officer and had never received any
adverse comment in her career but denial of promotion has caused her serious prejudice. In regard
to such lamentation, we deem it appropriate to observe that while the appellant, standing second in
rank in her batch and having never earned any adverse comment, cannot be faulted in making such
expressions but at the same time, it is expected of her to appreciate that when any particular
progression depends on comparative merit, and only the persons standing higher in merit have been
accorded such progression, her grievance cannot partake the character of a legal grievance that
could lead to any relief in law. We may put it differently also to say that not being found eligible for
promotion with reference to the criteria as provided is not, by itself, any adverse pronouncement
against the diligence and commitment of the appellant. Nothing further could be or need be said in
this matter.
CONCLUSION
31. In the result, this appeal fails and is therefore dismissed with no order as to costs and with the
observations foregoing.
………………..………….J. (A.M.KHANWILKAR) …………..………….…….J. (DINESH MAHESHWARI)
New Delhi, Dated: 24th April, 2020.
Sujata Kohli vs Registrar General High Court Of Delhi on 24 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18400826/
29
