Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 868
Author: M.R. Shah
Bench: M.R. Shah, R. Subhash Reddy, Ashok Bhushan
                                                               REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.827 OF 2020
                                   (Arising from SLP(Criminal) No.4336/2020)
          Sumedh Singh Saini                                   …Appellant
                                          Versus
          State of Punjab and another                          …Respondents
                                              JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated 08.09.2020
passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in CRM−M No. 26304 of 2020, by
which the application submitted by the appellant herein for anticipatory bail in connection with FIR
No. 77 dated 06.05.2020 for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC, lodged with Police
Station City Mataur, District S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali has been dismissed, the original petitioner –
accused has preferred the present appeal.
3. That one Palwinder Singh Multani, brother of one Balwant Singh Multani (deceased) has lodged
an FIR against the appellant at Police Station City Mataur initially for the offences punishable under
Sections 364, 201, 344, 219 and 120−B of the IPC, and subsequently the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC has been added.
3.1 It is alleged that in the year 1991 one Balwant Singh Multani – brother of the informant was
illegally abducted from his residence at Mohali by a team of officials operating under the
instructions of the appellant; that he was severely and inhumanly tortured while in custody, by and
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
1

at the behest of the appellant. It is further alleged that a false and fabricated FIR No. 112 of 1991
might have been registered at the instance of the appellant to suggest that the victim was brought to
the police station Qadian from where the victim was alleged to have escaped.
3.2 That apprehending his arrest in connection with FIR No. 77 dated 06.05.2020, the appellant
filed anticipatory bail application before the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mohali. At this
stage, it is required to be noted that when the appellant applied for anticipatory bail, the allegations
in the FIR against the appellant were only for the offences punishable under Sections 364, 201, 344,
330, 219 and 120−B of the IPC. That by order dated 11.05.2020, the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Mohali granted anticipatory bail in favour of the appellant. That thereafter as the appellant
was apprehending that the offence under Section 302 IPC may be added, he approached the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Mohali for anticipatory bail for the offence punishable under Section 302
also. By order dated 10.07.2020, the learned Additional Sessions Judge granted protection by way of
three days’ advance notice in case of addition of offence under Section 302 IPC. It appears that
thereafter three co−accused in FIR No. 77 dated 06.05.2020 wanted to become approver and they
submitted the applications before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mohali for grant of pardon
and declaring them as approver under Section 306 Cr.P.C. However, all the three applications came
to be dismissed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mohali, vide order dated 7.8.2020.
However, thereafter the applications submitted by the other co−accused – Jagir Singh and Kuldip
Singh to grant them pardon and permit them to become approver came to be allowed by the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mohali, vide order dated 18.08.2020. That thereafter the statements of
Jagir Singh and Kuldip Singh were recorded by the learned Judicial Magistrate (First Class), Mohali,
which were against the appellant. On the basis of the statements of the aforesaid two co−accused
who subsequently turned approver – Jagir Singh and Kuldip Singh, an application was submitted
before the learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class (Duty Magistrate) seeking addition of Section 302
IPC in FIR No. 77 dated 06.05.2020. That by order dated 21.08.2020, the learned Judicial
Magistrate, First Class (Duty Magistrate) allowed the said application and thus section 302 IPC
came to be added.
3.3 That thereafter the appellant applied for anticipatory bail for the offence under Section 302 IPC
before the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Mohali by way of bail application no. 1527 of 2020.
That the learned Additional Sessions Judge vide order dated 01.09.2020 dismissed the said
application. That thereafter the appellant approached the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Chandigarh with an application for grant of anticipatory bail being CRM−M No. 26304 of 2020. By
the impugned judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the said anticipatory bail
application. Hence, the appellant has preferred the present appeal.
4. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate has appeared for the appellant – accused, Shri
Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Advocate has appeared for the State of Punjab and Shri K.V.
Vishwanathan, learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of the original informant.
4.1 Number of submissions have been made by Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the appellant – accused in support of his prayer to grant anticipatory bail.
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
2

It is vehemently submitted that the present FIR is filed with a malafide intention to harass the
appellant and at the instance of the present party in power in the State. It is submitted that even
otherwise the present FIR is not maintainable as being a second FIR on the same set of facts and has
been registered after delay of 29 years of the alleged incident. It is submitted that earlier attempt to
falsely implicate the appellant failed and a similar FIR for the very incident in question and with
somewhat similar allegations came to be quashed by this Court in the case of State of Punjab v.
Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, reported in (2011) 14 SCC 770.
4.2 It is further submitted that the informant heavily placed reliance upon the liberty reserved in
favour of the father of Balwant Singh Multani to file fresh proceedings. It is submitted that however
during his life time the father of Balwant Singh Multani did not initiate any fresh proceedings and
after a period of six years and after the death of the father of Balwant Singh Multani, the present FIR
has been filed after 9 years of the judgment of this Court in the case of Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar
(supra) and after 29 years of the incident and that too by the brother of Balwant Singh Multani with
the political support of the current State Government. It is submitted that, as such, when initially
the present FIR was lodged, it was lodged on 6.5.2020 only for the offences under Sections 364, 201,
344, 330, 219 and 120−B of the IPC. It is submitted that thereafter the investigating agency with a
malafide intention pressurised two co−accused and made them approver and obtained the
statements against the appellant and on the basis of the statements of the two co− accused who
subsequently turned as approver, the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC has been added. 4.3
It is further submitted that even the present FIR also suffers from a serious jurisdictional error,
inasmuch as, the FIR is registered in Mohali on the directions of the SSP, Mohali, whereas, in fact,
all the events even as per the complainant occurred within the jurisdiction of P.S. Chandigarh. It is
submitted that as per Sections 177 and 178, Cr.P.C. the ordinary place of investigation and trial is
within whose local jurisdiction the offence has occurred. It is submitted that the present FIR No. 77
and the proceedings initiated pursuant thereto are a blatant abuse of process, malafide and misuse
of policing power. It is submitted that as such the appellant has already moved an application for
quashing FIR No. 77 dated 6.5.2020, which came to be dismissed by the High Court against which a
special leave petition is pending before this Court.
4.4 It is further submitted that even otherwise while adding the charge under Section 302 IPC in
FIR No. 77 dated 6.5.2020, the procedure as required to be followed as per the decisions of this
Court in the cases of Pradeep Ram v. State of Jharkhand, reported in 2019 (9) SCALE 120 and
Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi), reported in (2020) 5 SCC 1, has not been followed. It is
submitted that even the procedure adopted by the learned Magistrate, who allowed the prosecution
to add the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC is unknown to the procedure required to be
followed under the provisions of the Cr.P.C. 4.5 It is further submitted by Shri Rohatgi, learned
Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant that the appellant is ready and willing to co−
operate with the investigation, however, without prejudice to his rights and contentions in the
pending proceedings before this Court for quashing the FIR. It is submitted that the appellant is
highly decorated officer with a distinguished service record. Shri Rohatgi has also made submissions
on malafide, political vendetta and the harassment by the police.
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
3

4.6 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions of this Court, it is
prayed to allow the present application and grant anticipatory bail to the appellant.
5. The present application is vehemently opposed by Shri Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the respondent−State and Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the original informant. Relying upon the statements of Jagir Singh and
Kuldip Singh which were recorded during the course of investigation, it is vehemently submitted
that a case has been made out against the appellant−accused for the offence under Section 302 IPC.
It is submitted that the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC has been added after obtaining
the permission from the learned Magistrate. It is submitted that considering the material available
o n  r e c o r d ,  t h e  l e a r n e d  M a g i s t r a t e  a l l o w e d  t h e  a p p l i c a t i o n  s u b m i t t e d  b y  t h e
prosecution/investigating agency to add the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. It is
submitted that therefore a prima facie case is made out against the appellant.
5.1 Now so far as the delay in lodging the FIR is concerned, it is submitted that as per catena of
decisions of this Court, mere delay and/or political vendetta cannot be a ground to quash the
criminal proceedings, more particularly when the allegations are very serious and the allegations
against the police officers are of misuse of power, misuse of position, kidnapping and thereafter
killing the innocent person. It is submitted that truth must come out. It is submitted that the
custodial interrogation of the appellant is required.
5.2 It is further submitted that even the present FIR cannot be said to be the second FIR as
submitted on behalf of the appellant. It is submitted that the present criminal proceedings/FIR is by
the brother of the deceased who lost his brother and considering the liberty reserved by this Court in
the case of Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar (supra).
5.3 It is vehemently submitted by Shri Sidharth Luthra, learned Senior Advocate appearing on
behalf of the State and Shri K.V. Vishwanathan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the
original informant that the appellant is a very influential person and may tamper with the evidence
and therefore this is not a fit case to grant anticipatory bail to the appellant under Section 438
Cr.P.C.
5.4 Making the above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the present application by submitting that
when both, the learned trial Court as well as the High Court have refused to exercise the discretion
in favour of the appellant and have refused to grant anticipatory bail to the appellant, the same may
not be interfered with by this Court.
6. We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant−accused, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the State and learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original informant.
At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present appeal the only question which is required
to be considered is whether the appellant is entitled to the anticipatory bail under Section 438
Cr.P.C.?
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
4

7. Number of submissions have been made by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant−accused on political vendetta, malafide, delay in lodging the FIR, even the maintainability
of the impugned FIR etc. However, taking into consideration that the quashing petition filed by the
appellant− accused is pending before this Court and the issue whether the FIR/criminal proceedings
are required to be quashed or not is at large before this Court, we do not propose to elaborately deal
with all the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respective parties.
However, considering the fact that the impugned FIR has been lodged/filed by the brother of the
deceased after a period of almost 29 years from the date of incident and after a period of 9 years
from the date of decision of this Court in the case of Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar (supra) and nothing
is on record that in between he had taken any steps to initiate criminal proceedings and/or lodged
an FIR, we are of the opinion that at least a case is made out by the appellant for grant of
anticipatory bail under Section 438, Cr.P.C. Many a time, delay may not be fatal to the criminal
proceedings. However, it always depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. However,
at the same time, a long delay like 29 years as in the present case can certainly be a valid
consideration for grant of anticipatory bail.
8. Informant and the State are relying upon the observations made by this Court in the case of
Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar (supra) and the liberty reserved in para 117 to the applicant who earlier
filed the petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. (father of the deceased) to take recourse to fresh
proceedings, if permissible in law. However, suffice it to say that the said liberty was as such in
favour of the father of the deceased who in the earlier round of litigation before the High Court
(from which the SLP(Criminal) No. 6503−6509/2011 were arisen) filed the petitions under Section
482 Cr.P.C.. This Court reserved the liberty in favour of the father of the deceased to take recourse to
fresh proceedings by specifically observing that if permissible in law. It is reported that the father of
the deceased died in the year 2014. Till 2014, the father of the deceased did not initiate any fresh
proceedings. After a period of 9 years from the date of decision of this Court in the case of Davinder
Pal Singh Bhullar (supra), all of a sudden, now the informant – brother of the deceased has woken
up and has initiated the present criminal proceedings. Whether the fresh/present proceedings are
permissible in law are yet to be considered by this Court in the pending proceedings for quashing
the impugned FIR.
9. Looking to the status of the appellant and it is reported that he has retired in the year 2018 as
Director General of Police, Punjab after 30 years of service and the alleged incident is of the year
1991 and even in the present FIR initially there was no allegation for the offence under Section 302
IPC and the allegations were only for the offences under Sections 364, 201, 344, 330, 219 and 120−B
of the IPC, for which there was an order of anticipatory bail in favour of the appellant and
subsequently the offence under Section 302 IPC has been added on the basis of the statements of
Jagir Singh and Kuldip Singh – approvers only, we are of the opinion that the appellant has made
out a case for anticipatory bail.
10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal succeeds. The
impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, as well as, the learned Additional Sessions
Court dismissing the anticipatory bail applications of the appellant for the offence punishable under
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
5

Section 302 IPC in connection with FIR No. 77 dated 6.5.2020, registered at P.S. City Mataur,
District S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali are hereby quashed and set aside. It is ordered that in case of arrest of
the appellant – Sumedh Singh Saini in connection with FIR No. 77 dated 6.5.2020, registered at P.S.
City Mataur, District S.A.S. Nagar, Mohali for the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC, he
shall be released on bail on furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/− (Rupees one lakh
only) and two sureties of the like amount and to surrender the passport and to cooperate with the
investigation (however without prejudice to his rights and contentions in the pending proceedings to
quash the impugned FIR).
11. The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.
                             ………………………………………J.
                             [ASHOK BHUSHAN]
                             ……………………………………..J.
                             [R. SUBHASH REDDY]
NEW DELHI;                   ……………………………………..J.
DECEMBER 03, 2020            [M.R. SHAH]
Sumedh Singh Saini vs The State Of Punjab on 3 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66168928/
6
