Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company
Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 3149, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
596
Author: Indira Banerjee
Bench: Indira Banerjee, R. Banumathi
                                                                                        
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2632 OF 2020
                              ( Arising Out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 20569 of 2
                         Surendra Kumar Bhilawe                                  … Appel
                                                             versus
                         The New India Assurance Company
                         Limited                                             … Responden
                                                    JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2. This appeal is against a judgment and order dated 23.2.2015 passed by the National Consumers
Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi, hereinafter referred to as ‘National Commission’,
allowing Revision Petition No.4126/2014 filed by the Respondent, hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Insurer’, setting aside an order dated 09.1.2014 passed by the District Consumer Disputes Redressal
Forum, Raipur, hereinafter referred to as ‘the District Forum’ allowing the Complaint Case No.404
of 2012; and an order dated 22.7.2014 passed by the Chhattisgarh State Consumer Disputes
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
1

Redressal Commission Pandri, Raipur (C.G), hereinafter referred to as the State Commission,
dismissing an appeal being Appeal No.FA/14/85 of the Insurer against the said order of the District
Forum; and dismissing the said complaint filed by the Appellant.
3. The Appellant was the owner of Ashok Leyland 2214 Truck bearing Registration Number
C.G.04/JA 3835, which was covered by a Policy of Insurance issued by the Insurer being Policy
Number was 45030031110100001693, effective for the period from 2.6.2011 to 1.6.2012.
4. On 11.11.2011, the said lorry, which was loaded with Ammonia Nitrate at Raipur, commenced its
journey for Dhanbad, where the Ammonia Nitrate was to be unloaded. The lorry was driven by
Driver, Rajendra Singh.
5. On 13.11.2011, at about 1.45 p.m., while the said truck was on its journey from Raipur to Dhanbad,
it met with an accident near Bhakuwa Toil Police Station, Gumla in Jharkhand. It is stated that
while negotiating the said truck, near a culvert, to save a cow, which had come on its way, the Driver
lost control, as a result of which the said truck turned turtle and fell into a river by the side of the
road and was extensively damaged. The Ammonia Nitrate, carried in the truck was also washed
away.
6. The accident was reported to the Gumla Police Station, District Gumla, Jharkhand on 16.11.2011
and on 25.11.2011 the Appellant lodged a claim with the Insurer, through one Mohammad Iliyas
Ansari.
7. On receipt of information regarding the accident, and the claim, the Insurer appointed an
independent Surveyor and Loss Assessor to conduct a spot survey. The independent Surveyor and
Loss Assessor appointed by the Insurer, namely, Shri Birendra Kumar Gupta, conducted a spot
survey and submitted his report on 29.11.2011.
8. The Insurer, thereafter, appointed one Shri Gyan Chandra, Valuer, Surveyor, Loss Assessor and
Investigator to conduct the final survey. The said Shri Gyan Chandra submitted a report dated
25.1.2012 assessing the loss recoverable from the insurer at Rs.4,93,500/- after deduction of salvage
value.
9. However, instead of reimbursing the loss, the Insurer issued a show cause Letter dated 22.3.2012
to the Appellant requiring the Appellant to show cause why the claim of the Appellant should not be
repudiated, on the allegation that, he had already sold the said truck to the said Mohammad Iliyas
Ansari on 11.4.2008. It is, however, not in dispute that the Appellant continued to be the registered
owner of the said truck, on the date of the accident.
10. It is the case of the Appellant, that the said truck which had been purchased with finance from
ICICI Bank, stood hypothecated to ICICI Bank, and the same could not be transferred without the
consent of ICICI Bank. ICICI Bank had not issued ‘No Objection’ to the Appellant for transfer of the
said truck, as the dues of ICICI Bank had not been repaid in full till the date of the accident.
Admittedly, however, the Appellant had entered into a sale agreement with the said Mohammed
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
2

Iliyas Ansari.
11. The Appellant claims that he duly replied to the show cause letter and that he also sent a legal
notice on 2.6.2012 to the Insurer, to which there was no reply. The Insurer was disputing the claim,
as it had been submitted by Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, and also on the ground of delay in filing the
police complaint and in reporting the accident to the Insurer.
12. The Appellant himself submitted a motor claim again on 22.8.2012, but the Insurer refused to
accept the same. Under cover of a letter dated 22.8.2012, the Appellant sent the claim form, along
with the requisite documents, to the Insurer by Registered Post.
13. Aggrieved by the action of the Insurer company in not releasing the claim of the Appellant,
towards reimbursement of losses on account of the accident, the Appellant approached the District
Forum with the complaint numbered Case No. 404 of 2012, referred to above.
14. By a judgment and order dated 9.1.2014, the District Forum allowed the complaint filed by the
Appellant and directed the Insurer to pay Rs.4,93,500/- to the Appellant within a month along with
interest @ 6% per annum from the date of filing of the complaint, that is, 6.10.2012 till the date of
payment and further directed the Insurer to pay the Appellant a sum of Rs.5,000/- towards
compensation for mental agony and Rs.2,000/- towards cost of litigation.
15. The Insurer appealed to the State Commission. The said appeal, being Appeal No.FA/14/85, was
dismissed by the State Commission by an order dated 22.7.2014, which was challenged by the
Insurer before the National Commission by filing the Revision Petition No. 4126 of 2014.
16. By the Judgment and order impugned before us, the National Commission has allowed the
Revision Petition, set aside the orders of the District Forum and the State Commission respectively,
and dismissed the complaint of the Appellant.
17. From the judgment and order dated 9.1.2014 of the District Forum, it is patently clear that the
complaint had been resisted by the Insurer on the purported ground that the Appellant had sold the
said truck to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari for a consideration of Rs.1,40,000/- and also on the ground
of delay in filing a police complaint and in lodging the claim for reimbursement of losses.
18. Before the district Forum, the Insurer contended that the claim of the Appellant had been
rejected by the Insurer by a letter dated 22.3.2012, which had duly been received by the Appellant
on 22.3.2012. There was no reply to the said letter. On the other hand, the Appellant contended that
even though he had entered into a sale agreement with Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, he had not
actually transferred ownership of the vehicle to him. Even after the sale agreement, the Appellant
had himself been paying instalments, to ICICI Bank, towards repayment of the loan obtained by him
for purchase of the said truck.
19. The Appellant contended that he had not been paid the full consideration for the said truck, even
as late as on 13.11.2011, when the accident occurred. That is why the Appellant had himself paid
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
3

insurance premium and taken out the Policy No. 45030031110100001693. The Appellant strenously
contended that the Insurer had not produced a scrap of document before the District Forum to show
that the premium for the said Insurance Policy No. 45030031110100001693 had been paid by
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari. No proceedings had also been initiated for change of registration of the
vehicle, which was in the name of the Appellant, to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari. The permit for
operating the said truck also stood in the name of the Appellant.
20. The District Forum accepted the contention of the Appellant that the ownership of the said truck
did not stand transferred to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, and allowed the complaint, by its order dated
9.1.2014, for the reasons summarized briefly hereinbelow:-
1. Even though the sale agreement with Mohammad Iliyas Ansari was dated
11.4.2008, the Appellant continued to pay instalments towards repayment of the loan
obtained from ICICI Bank, for purchase of the said truck, long thereafter.
2. The Appellant had produced documents to show that he had paid the premium for
the insurance policy after 11.4.2008, and even as late as on 31.05.2011.
3. The Insurer had not produced any materials to show said that the insurance
premium had not been paid by the Appellant, but had been paid by Mohammad
Iliyas Ansari.
4. The said truck was registered in the name of the Appellant and the permit for
operating the said truck for carriage of goods also stood in his name.
5. Mohammad Iliyas Ansari had not objected to release of compensation to the
Appellant for damage caused to the vehicle, by reason of the accident.
6. The Insurer had not established that Driver, Rajendra Singh was an employee of
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
21. It had also been argued on behalf of the Appellant, before the District Forum, that the Surveyor
appointed by the Insurer had taken a consent letter from the Appellant after the Survey, but had not
taken any statement from Mohammad Iliyas Ansari or from the Driver which could show that
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari was the owner of the said truck, or the Driver was the employee of
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
22. The District Forum, thus allowed the claim, holding in effect, that the Appellant continued to be
the owner of the vehicle. On the basis of the report of the Surveryor, the gross liability was calculated
at Rs.8,48,500/- from which salvage value of Rs. 3,55,000/- was deducted and the net loss
recoverable from the Insurer computed at Rs.4,93,500/-.
23. The District Forum directed the Insurer to pay to the Appellant the said sum of Rs.4,93,500/-,
with simple interest at 6% per annum from the date of the institution of the complaint, that is,
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
4

6.10.2012, a sum of Rs.5,000/- for mental harassment and a sum of Rs.2,000/- towards litigation
expenses.
24. In appeal the State Commission found:-
“11. We have perused the record of the District Forum. In Certificate of Registration
of the vehicle in question, the name of the Respondent (complainant) Surendra
Kumar Bhilawe is recorded as registered owner. In the license of Good Vehicle also
vehicle bearing No.C.G.04-JA-3835 is registered in the name of the Respondent
(Complainant) Surendra Kumar Bhilawe and the Insurance Policy was issued in the
name of Respondent (Complainant) Surendra Kumar Bhilawe for the period from
02.06.2011 to 01.06.2012. Looking to the above documents, it appears that the
vehicle in question was still recorded in the name of Respondent (Complainant)
himself obtained insurance policy from the Appellant (Insurance Company).
12. The Respondent (Complainant) filed documents i.e. letter dated 08.01.2014 sent
by ICICI Bank to the Respondent (complainant) Surendra Kumar Bhilawe and
Statement of Account. It appears that the loan was being deposited by the
Respondent (Complainant) himself and the Appellant (Ops) could not filed any
document which shows or indicates that the amount of loan was paid by Mohd. Iliyas
Ansari, in the name of the Respondent (Complainant). It appears that the
Respondent (complainant) himself had deposited loan amount with the ICICI Bank
from where he had obtained loan.
13. An agreement was executed between the Respondent (complainant) Surendra
Kumar Bhilawe and Mohammad Iliyas Ansari on 11.04.2008 and the Insurance
Policy was obtained by the Respondent (Complainant) on 02.06.2011, which was
effective from the period from 02.06.2011 to 01.06.2012. Had the vehicle in question
was transferred by the Respondent (complainant) to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, the
Respondent (Complainant) could have intimated the R.T.O. regarding transferring
the vehicle in favour of Mohammad Iliyas Ansari and Mohammad Iliyas Ansari
himself could have deposited the amount of loan with the ICICI Bank. In the instant
case, Mohammad Iliyas Ansari is a material evidence for the Appellant (Ops) to prove
that he purchased vehicle in question from the Respondent (complainant) and
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, therefore, on merely filing an agreement executed between
the Respondent (Complainant) and Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, it cannot be said the
vehicle in question was duly transferred by the Respondent (Complainant) to
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari and Mohammed Iliyas Ansari is owner of the vehicle in
question.
14. Ld. District Forum, in para 12 of the Impugned Order has observed that
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari has not raised any objection against the complaint filed by
the Respondent (complainant) from which it is proved that sale agreement is
meaningless. The Appellant (OPs) could not prove that river Rajendra Singh was an
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
5

employee of Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, whereas the contention of the Respondent
(complainant) is that vide letter dated 08.08.2012 which was received by the
Appellant (OPs) (Insurance Company) wherein it was mentioned by him that by the
above sale agreement, the purchaser has not received any right and the Respondent
(complainant) only is registered owner of the vehicle. In para 13, the District Forum
has observed that the contention of the Respondent (complainant) is that the
Surveyor, who was appointed by the Insurance company, has taken consent letter
dated 02.01.2012 of Respondent (complainant) after conducting survey. The
Appellant (OPs) had not filed any evidence that they had taken statement of
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari or statement of the driver who mentioned that the vehicle
was of the ownership of Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
15. The finding recorded by the District Forum, is just and proper and does not suffer
from any jurisdictional erroneously, irregularity or illegality, hence does not call for
any interference by this Commission.”
25. The National Commission set aside the orders of the District Forum and the State Commission,
thereby rejecting the concurrent factual finding of both the fora, and dismissed the complaint on the
ground that the Appellant had sold his vehicle to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
26. The National Commission observed that when an owner of a vehicle sells his vehicle and
executes a sale letter without in any manner postponing passing of the title to the property in the
vehicle, the ownership in the vehicle passes to the purchaser on execution of the sale letter. The
delivery of the vehicle, to the purchaser, reinforces the title which the purchaser gets to the vehicle,
on execution of the sale letter in his favour. The National Commission also drew adverse inference
against the Appellant, since the FIR was lodged with the Police on 16.11.2008, that is, three days
after the accident and intimation of the claim was given to the Appellant 12 days after the accident,
that is, on 25.11.2011.
27. The National Commission Held:-
“A perusal of the sale agreement dated 11.4.2008 executed by the complainant with
Shri Mohd. Iliyas Ansari would show that the complainant handed over the
possession of the aforesaid vehicle to Shri Ansari on payment of Rs.1,40,000/- Since
the vehicle had been got financed from ICICI Bank the remaining payment was to be
made by the purchaser directly to the said bank. The aforesaid document also shows
that a sum of Rs.1,40,000/- was received by the complainant from Shri Ansari on
11.4.2008. Thus, it stands duly proved that not only had the complainant received the
sale consideration agreed with Shri Ansari he had also delivered the possession of the
vehicle to him on 11.4.2008.
7.Though the vehicle was not got registered in the name of Shri Ansari by the time it
met with an accident, that in our opinion, would be of no consequence in view of the
sale having been already completed on 11.4.2008.”
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
6

28. The National Commission completely ignored the following concurrent factual findings of the
District Forum and State Commission:-
(I) Even after the date of the purported sale agreement, that is, 11.4.2008, the
Appellant continued to pay instalments to ICICI Bank towards repayment of the loan
for purchase of the said truck.
(ii) The ICICI Bank had neither released the said truck from hypothecation nor given
‘No Objection” for the sale of the said truck.
(iii) The Appellant paid the premium and took out the policy of insurance on or about
31.5.2011 covering the period from 2.6.2011 to 1.6.2012 in his own name. This was
over three years after the date of the purported sale agreement.
(iv) No steps were taken by the Appellant or by Mohammad Iliyas Ansari to have the
registration of the said truck transferred in the name of Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
(v) The permit for operating the said truck was still in the name of the Appellant over
three years after the purported sale agreement.
29. There was no material evidence at all before the National Commission, on the basis of which the
National Commission could have reversed the concurrent factual findings of the District Forum and
the State Commission which unerringly led to the conclusion that ownership of the said truck never
stood transferred to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
30. In fact, the National Commission did not address the following questions:-
(i) Who actually paid instalments to ICICI Bank after 11.4.2008 – the Appellant or
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari? The concurrent finding of the District Forum and the State
Commission that the Appellant paid instalments to ICICI Bank even after 11.4.2008,
therefore, remained unshaken.
(ii) If the ownership of the said truck stood transferred on 11.4.2008, why would the Appellant
continue to pay the instalments to ICICI Bank towards repayment of the loan for purchase of the
said truck?
(iii) Was any ‘No Objection’ obtained from ICICI Bank for transfer of the said truck?
(iv) Could the Appellant have transferred the said truck without ‘No Objection’ from ICICI Bank?
(v) Who actually paid the Insurance Premium on 31.5.2011 for the said Policy
No.45030031110100001693 effective from 2.6.2011 to 1.6.2012?
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
7

(vi) If the ownership of the said truck were transferred, why would the Appellant have taken out an
Insurance Policy covering the said truck in his own name even on 31.5.2011, after over three years?
(vii) Was the Driver Rajendra Singh employee of the Appellant or of Mohammad Iliyas Ansari? Was
any statement in this regard taken either from Driver Rajendra Singh or Mohammad Iliyas Ansari?
(viii) Were any steps ever taken for transfer of registration of the said truck in the name of
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari?
(ix) If the ownership of the said truck stood transferred to Mohammad Iliyas Ansari, why did he not
take steps to have the registration of the said truck transferred in his own name even after three
years?
(x) In whose name did the permit to operate the said truck stand?
(xi) Why would Mohammad Iliyas Ansari run the said truck with a permit in the name of the
Appellant, if he was its owner, thereby exposing himself to penal consequences under the Motor
Vehicle Act and the Rules framed thereunder?
(xii) Could ownership of the said truck be transferred without transfer of registration in the name of
the transferee, in view of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and the Rules framed thereunder?
31. In our considered opinion, Sections 19 and 20 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, which deal with the
stage at which the property in movable goods passes to the buyer, is of no assistance to the Insurer.
There can be no doubt that property in a specific movable property is transferred to the buyer at
such time as parties to the contract intend it to be transferred, provided such immovable property is
free to be transferred, and/or in other words capable of being transferred.
32. If there is an impediment to the transfer, as in the instant case, where ‘No Objection’ of the
financier bank was imperative for transfer of the said truck, there could be no question of transfer of
title until the impediment were removed, for otherwise the contract for transfer would be injurious
to the financier bank, immoral, unlawful and void under Section 10 read with Sections 23 and 24 of
the Contract Act, 1872.
33. It was thus, an implicit condition of the agreement for transfer of the said truck, that the transfer
would be complete only upon issuance of ‘No Objection” by the financier bank and upon compliance
with the statutory requirements for transfer of a motor vehicle.
34. The contract in this case, could not possibly have been an unconditional contract of transfer of
movable property in deliverable state, but a contract to transfer, contingent upon ‘No Objection”
from ICICI Bank, and compliance with the statutory provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and
the Rules framed thereunder. Sections 19 and 20 of the Sale of Goods Act are not attracted.
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
8

35. The National Commission overlooked the definition of ‘owner’ in Section 2(30) of the Motor
Vehicle Act, 1988. In Section 2(30) ‘owner’ has been defined to mean “a person in whose name a
motor vehicle stands registered and, where such person is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and
in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a hire purchase agreement, or an agreement of
lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in possession of the vehicle under that
agreement”. Even assuming that Mohammad Iliyas Ansari was in possession of the said truck at the
time of the accident, such possession was not under any agreement of lease, hire purchase or
hypothecation with ICIC Bank.
36. It would also be pertinent to note the difference between the definition of owner in Section 2(30)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the definition of owner in Section 2(19) of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1939 which has been repealed and replaced by the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Under the old Act
‘owner’ meant the person in possession of a motor vehicle. The definition has undergone a change.
Legislature has consciously changed the definition of ‘owner’ to mean the person in whose name the
motor vehicle stands.
37. The National Commission also overlooked other applicable provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act
1988, particularly Sections 39 to 41, 50, 51, 66, 69, 82, 84(g), 86(c), 146, 157, 177 and 192A.
38. Some of the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act are set out hereinbelow:-
“50. Transfer of ownership-
1) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this Chapter is
transferred-
(a) the transferor shall,-
(i) in the case of a vehicle registered within the same State, within fourteen days of
the transfer, report the fact of transfer, in such form with such documents and in
such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering
authority within whose jurisdiction the transfer is to be effected and shall
simultaneously send a copy of the said report to the transferee; and
(ii) ……
(b) the transferee shall, within thirty days of the transfer, report the transfer to the
registering authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of
business where the vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward the
certificate of registration to that registering authority together with the prescribed fee
and a copy of the report received by him from the transfer of ownership may be
entered in the certificate of registration.
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
9

(3) If the transferor of the transferee fails to report to the registering authority the
fact of transfer within the period specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section
(1), as the case may be, or if the person who is required to make an application under
sub-section (2) (hereafter in this section referred to as the other person) fails to make
such application within the period the period prescribed, the registering authority
may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, required the transferor or the
transferee, or the other person, as the case may be, to pay, in lieu of any action that
may be taken against him under section 177 such amount not exceeding one hundred
rupees as may be prescribed under sub-section (5).
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the transferor or the transferee or the
other person, as the case may be, where he fails to pay the said amount.
xxx xxx xxx
66. Necessity for permits-
(1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in
any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in
accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State
Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle in that place
in the manner in which the vehicle is being used.
   xxx              xxx               xxx
82.Transfer of permit-
(1)Save as provided in sub-section (2), a permit shall not be transferable from one person to another
except with the permission of the transport authority which granted the permit and shall not,
without such permission, operate to confer on any person to whom a vehicle covered by the permit
is transferred any right to use that vehicle in the manner authorised by the permit.
xxx xxx xxx
84. General conditions attaching to all permit The following shall be conditions of every permit-
………………..
(g) that the name and address of the operator shall be painted or otherwise firmly affixed to every
vehicle to which the permit relates on the exterior of the body of that vehicle on both sides thereof in
a colour or colours vividly contrasting to the colour of the vehicle centered as high as practicable
below the window line in bold letters.
xxx xxx xxx
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits.- (1)The Transport Authority which granted a permit
may cancel the permit or may suspend it for such period as it thinks fit-
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
10

………………..
(c)     if the holder of the permit ceases to own the
vehicle covered by the permit,
        xxx                xxx               xxx
140. Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault-
(1) Where death or permanent disablement of any person has resulted from an accident arising out
of the use of motor vehicle or motor vehicles, the owner of the vehicle shall, or, as the case may be,
the owners of the vehicles shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay compensation in respect of
such death or disablement in accordance with the provisions of this section.
xxx xxx xxx
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risk-
(1) No person shall use, except as a passenger, or cause or allow any other person to use, a motor
vehicle in a public place, unless there is in force in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or
that person, as the case may be, a policy of insurance complying with the requirement of this
Chapter.
xxx xxx xxx
157. Transfer of certificate of Insurance-- (1) Where a person in whose favour the certificate of
insurance has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter transfers to another
person the ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together
with the policy of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the policy described in
the certificate shall be deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor
vehicle is transferred with effect from the date of its transfer.
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the prescribed form
to the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of
insurance and the policy described in the certificate in his favour and the insurer shall make the
necessary changes in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regards to the transfer of
insurance.
           xxx                xxx               xxx
  163A. Special provisions as to payment                  of
compensation on structured formula basis- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in
any other law for time being in force or instrument having the force of law, the owner of the motor
vehicle or the authorised insurer shall be liable to pay in the case of death or permanent disablement
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
11

due to accident arising out of the use of motor vehicle, compensation, as indicated in the Second
Schedule, to the legal heirs or the victim, as the case may be.
xxx xxx xxx
177. General provision for punishment of offences- Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act
or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the
offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one hundered rupees, and
for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.
xxx xxx xxx 192A. Using vehicle without permit-
(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of
the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any condition of a permit
relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purposes for which the vehicle may be
used, shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be
less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less
than five thousand rupees or with both.
Provided that the Court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.
39. It appears that the National Commission patently erred in holding that the Appellant had been
paid the consideration without even examining if Mohammad Iliyas Ansari had paid any
instalments to ICICI Bank.
40. The finding of the National Commission that the fact of registration of the said truck in the name
of the Appellant was inconsequential is also not sustainable in law. Section 2(30) of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 defines ‘owner’ to mean the person in whose name the motor vehicle stands
registered. The definition of ‘owner’ has been overlooked and ignored by the National Commission.
Had ownership of the said truck intended to be transferred forthwith, the registration would have
been transferred in the name of the transferee, as also the permit to operate the said truck for
carriage of goods.
41. It is difficult to accept that a person who has transferred the ownership of a goods carriage
vehicle on receipt of consideration, would not report the transfer or apply for transfer of
registration, and thereby continue to incur the risks and liabilities of ownership of the vehicle under
the provisions of law including in particular, under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and other
criminal/penal laws. It does not also stand to reason why a person who has transferred the
ownership of the vehicle should, for over three years, benevolently go on repaying the loan for
purchase of the vehicle, take out insurance policies to cover the vehicle or otherwise discharge
obligations of ownership.
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
12

42. It is equally incredible that an owner of a vehicle who has paid consideration to acquire the
vehicle would not insist on transfer of the permit and thereby expose himself to the penal
consequence of operating a goods vehicle without a valid permit.
43. The National Commission also failed to appreciate that Section 157 of the Motor Vehicles Act
provides that where a person, in whose favour the certificate of insurance has been issued in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XI of the Motor Vehicles Act, transfers to another person
the ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together with the
policy of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the
certificate are to be deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor
vehicle is transferred, with effect from the date of its transfer.
44. The explanation to Section 157 clarifies, for the removal of all doubts, that such deemed transfer
would include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and policy of
insurance. The transferee might, within 14 days from the date of transfer, apply to the Insurer in the
prescribed form, for making requisite changes in the certificate of insurance and the policy of
insurance with regard to the factum of transfer of insurance. There could be no reason for a
transferee of an insured motor vehicle, to refrain from applying for endorsement of the transfer in
the Insurance Policy Certificate when insurance covering third party risk is mandatory for using a
vehicle.
45. In any case, there could be no reason for the Appellant to take out an insurance cover in his own
name as late as on 31.5.2011, covering the period from 2.6.2011 till 1.6.2012, if the Appellant had
transferred ownership of the vehicle in April 2008. It is incredible that the transferee, Mohammad
Iliyas Ansari would take the risk of operating a vehicle, owned by him, without taking out a policy of
Insurance in his own name, inter alia, covering third party risks, notwithstanding the mandate of
Section 146 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 prohibiting the use of a motor vehicle without third
party insurance
46. The judgment of this Court in Complete Insulations Private Limited vs. New Indian Assurance
Company Limited1 was rendered in the context of Motor Vehicle Act, 1939 which has been repealed
and replaced by the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. As observed in the said judgment itself, under Section
103-A of the old Act, the Insurer had the right to refuse to transfer the certificate of insurance
and/or the Insurance policy. However, Section 157 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 introduces a
deeming provision whereby the transfer of the 1 (1996) 1 SCC 221 certificate of Insurance and the
policy of Insurance are deemed to have been made, where the vehicle along with the Insurance
policy is transferred by the owner to another person. This provision has taken away the Insurer’s
right of refusal to transfer the Policy Certificate of Insurance. which was there under the old Act. The
judgment of this Court in Dr. T.V. Jose vs. Chacko P.P. @ Thankachan and Ors.2 was also rendered
in the context of the Motor Vehicles Act of 1939.
47. In Pushpa @ Leela And Others vs. Shakuntala and Others3, the question before this Court was,
whether liability to pay compensation to third parties as determined by the Motor Vehicles
Accidents Claims Tribunal in case of an accident, was that of the purchaser of the vehicle alone, or
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
13

whether the liability of the recorded owner of the vehicle was coextensive, and from the recorded
owner it would pass on to the Insurer of the vehicle. This Court found that the person whose name
continued in the 2 (2001) 8 SCC 748 3 (2011) 2 SCC 240 records of the registering authority as the
owner of the truck was equally liable for payment of the compensation, having regard to the
provisions of Section 2(30) read with Section 50 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and since an
insurance policy had been taken out in the name of the recorded owner, he was indemnified and the
Insurer would be liable to satisfy the third party claims.
48. In Naveen Kumar vs. Vijay Kumar and Others 4, a three- Judge Bench of this Court held that in
view of the definition of the expression ‘owner’ in Section 2(30) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, it is
the person in whose name the motor vehicle stands registered, who, for the purposes of the said Act,
would be treated as the owner of the vehicle. Where the registered owner purports to transfer the
vehicle, but continues to be reflected in the records of the Registering Authority as the owner of the
vehicle, he would not stand absolved of his liability as owner.
4 (2018) 3 SCC 1
49. The Judgment of this Court in Pushpa @ Leela & Ors. vs. Shakuntala (supra) and Naveen Kumar
vs. Vijay Kumar (supra) were rendered in the context of liability to satisfy third party claims and as
such distinguishable factually. However, the dictum of this Court that the registered owner
continues to remain owner and when the vehicle is Insured in the name of the registered owner, the
Insurer would remain liable notwithstanding any transfer, would apply equally in the case of claims
made by the insured himself in case of an accident. If the insured continues to remain the owner in
law in view of the statutory provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and in particular Section
2(30) thereof, the Insurer cannot evade its liability in case of an accident.
50. The policy of insurance in this case, was apparently a comprehensive policy of Insurance which
covered third party risk as well. The Insurer could not have repudiated only one part of the contract
of insurance to reimburse the owner for losses, when it could not have evaded its liability to third
parties under the same contract of Insurance in case of death, injury, loss or damage by reason of an
accident.
51. The FIR was lodged within three days of the accident. In the case of a major accident of the kind
as in this case, where the said truck had turned turtle and fallen into a river, slight delay if any, on
the part of the traumatized driver to lodge an FIR, cannot defeat the legitimate claim of the Insured.
Of course in our view, there was no delay at all in lodging the FIR. In case of a serious accident in
course of inter-state transportation of goods, delay of 20 days in lodging a claim is also no delay at
all. It is nobody’s case that the claim application filed by the Appellant was time barred. Moreover,
the Insurer had, in any case, duly sent its Surveyors/ Assessors to assess the loss. The claim of the
Appellant could not have, in this case, been resisted, either on the ground of delay in lodging the
FIR, or on the ground of delay in lodging an Accident Information Report, or on the ground of delay
in making a claim.
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
14

52. In any case, as held by this Court in Om Prakash vs. Reliance General Insurance and Another 5
delay in 5 (2017) 1 SCC 724 intimation of accident, or submission of documents due to unavoidable
circumstances, should not bar settlement of genuine claims.
53. In our considered opinion, the National Commission erred in law in reversing the concurrent
factual findings of the District Forum and the National Commission ignoring vital admitted facts as
stated above, including registration of the said truck being in the name of the Appellant, even as on
the date of the accident, over three years after the alleged transfer, payment by the Appellant of the
premium for the Insurance Policy, issuance of Insurance Policy in the name of the Appellant, permit
in the name of the Appellant even after three years and seven months, absence of ‘No Objection’
from the financier bank etc. and also overlooking the definition of owner in Section 2(30) of the
Motor Vehicles Act, as also other relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules framed
thereunder, including in particular the transferability of a policy of insurance under Section 157.
54. In view of the definition of ‘owner’ in Section 2(30) of the Motor Vehicles Act, the Appellant
remained the owner of the said truck on the date of the accident and the Insurer could not have
avoided its liability for the losses suffered by the owner on the ground of transfer of ownership to
Mohammad Iliyas Ansari.
55. The judgment of this Court in Oriental Insurance vs. Sony Cheriyam6 was rendered in the
context of liability of an Insurer in terms of the insurance policy and is not attracted in this case,
where the claim of the insured has not been rejected on the ground of the same not being covered by
the policy of insurance, but on the ground of purported transfer to a third party by entering into a
sale agreement.
56. We have not dealt with the judgments of the National Commission and/or other Fora under the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, relied upon by the parties, as they are factually distinguishable and
are in any case, not precedents binding on this Court. In any case, we have considered and dealt with
the submission of the respective parties at length.
57. The judgment and order of the National Commission is 6 (1999) 6 SCC 451 unsustainable. The
appeal is, therefore, allowed. The impugned order of the National Commission under appeal is set
aside and the order of the District Forum is restored. The Insurer shall pay to the Appellant a sum of
Rs.4,93,500/- as directed by the District Forum with interest as enhanced by this Court to 9% per
annum from the date of claim till the date of payment. The sum of Rs.5,000/- awarded by the
District Forum towards compensation for mental agony and Rs.2,000/- awarded towards the cost of
litigation, is in our view grossly inadequate. The Insurer shall pay a composite sum of Rs.1,00,000/-
to the Appellant towards costs and compensation for the agony caused to the Appellant by
withholding his legitimate dues. The amounts as directed above shall be paid to the Appellant within
six weeks from date of the judgment and order.
..….............................J. [ R. Banumathi ] ..................................J. [ Indira Banerjee] JUNE 18, 2020
NEW DELHI
Surendra Kumar Bhilawe vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd. on 18 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106362639/
15
