Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance
Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1977, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
467
Author: R.F. Nariman
Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, R.F. Nariman
                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2235 OF 2020
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO.1170 OF 2019)
           SUSHILABEN INDRAVADAN GANDHI & ANR.                        …APPELLANTS
                                                      VERSUS
           THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE
           COMPANY LIMITED & ORS.                                     ...RESPONDENTS
                                                  JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. On 09.06.1997, the husband of the Appellant No.1, who was a surgeon, was travelling in a
mini-bus that was owned by the Rotary Eye Institute, Navsari (the Respondent No. 3 herein) along
with other medical staff of the said Institute. The mini-bus had been driven with excessive speed, as
a result of which at around 8.30 P.M. when the mini-bus was passing through the Gandevi-Navsari
Road, near Kabhar Patiya, the driver of the mini-bus lost control and the vehicle turned turtle. The
husband of Appellant No.1 was seriously injured and ultimately succumbed to his injuries.
3. On 17.04.1997, the Respondent No. 3 had entered into a comprehensive Private Car ‘B’ Policy
from the New India Assurance Company Limited (the Respondent No. 1 herein). The aforesaid
Insurance Policy was valid from 24.04.1997 till 20.04.1998. The limitation of liability clause which
has been relied upon by the impugned judgment of the High Court is set out as follows:
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
1

“SECTION II LIABILITY T„ THIRD PARTIES
1. Subject to the limits of liability as laid down in the Schedule hereto the Company
will indemnify the insured in the event of an accident caused by or arising out of the
use Motor Car against all sums including claimant's costs and expenses which the
insured shall become legally liable to pay in respect of
(a) death of or bodily injury to any person including occupants carried in the motor
car (provided such occupants are not carried for hire or reward) but except so far as it
is necessary to meet the requirements of Motor Vehicles Act, the Company shall not
be liable where such death or injury arises out of and in the course of the employment
of such person by the insured.” In addition, endorsement IMT-5 states:
“I.M.T.5. Personal Accidental cover to unnamed passengers other than the insured
and his paid driver or cleaner.
In consideration of the payment of an additional premium it is hereby understood
and agreed that the Company undertakes to pay compensation on the scale provided
below for bodily injury as hereinafter defined sustained by any passenger other than
the insured and/or his paid driver attendant or cleaner and/or a person in the
employ of the insured coming within the scope of the Workman Compensation Act,
1923 and subsequent amendments of the said Act and engaged in and upon the
service of the insured at the time such injury is sustained whilst mounting into
dismounting from or travelling in but not driving the motor car and caused by violent
accidental external and visible means which independently of any other cause shall
within three calendar months of the occurrence of such injury result in:
Scale of Compensation
a) Death only 100%
b) Total and irrecoverable loss of:
i) Sight of both eyes or of the 100% actual loss by physical separation of the two
entire hands or two entire feet or of one entire hand and one entire food or of such
loss of one eye and such loss of one entire hand or of one entire foot
ii) Use of two hands or two feet, 100% or of one hand and one foot or of such loss of
sight of one eye and such loss of use of one hand or one foot.
c) Total and irrecoverable loss of:
i) the sight of one eye or the 100% actual loss by physical separation of one entire
hand or one entire foot
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
2

ii) Use of a hand or a foot without 100% physical separation There is no dispute that
additional premium was paid for endorsement IMT-5, which will therefore be
applicable in the facts of this case. It is also undisputed that endorsement IMT-16,
which deals with a general liability to employees of the insured who may be travelling
in the employer’s car, other than paid drivers, may also be covered on payment of an
additional premium. It is undisputed on the facts of this case that as far as
endorsement IMT-16 is concerned, no such additional premium was paid.
4. The husband of the Appellant No.1, Dr. Alpesh I. Gandhi, had entered into a contract for services,
dated 04.05.1996, as an Honorary Ophthalmic Surgeon at the aforesaid Respondent No. 3 institute.
Since the important question to be determined in this appeal is whether Dr. Alpesh I. Gandhi can be
said to be employed by the Respondent No. 3 or has only entered into a contract for services with
the Respondent No. 3 as an independent professional, the terms of the contract being important are
set out herein in full:
“SUB: CONTRACT FOR SERVICES AS HONORARY OPHTHALMIC SURGEON AT
ROTARY EYE INSTITUTE, NAVSARI.
This contract on the captioned subject entered into between Dr. ALPESH I. GANDHI,
hereinafter referred to as AIG and the Rotary Eye Institute, Navsari, hereinafter
referred to as REIN, has become effective from dated 01-04-1996 and the same is
governed by the following terms and conditions.
I.DESIGNATION: Honorary Ophthalmiç Surgeon.
II.HONORARIUM: Rs. 4000/- P.M III.OTHER COMPENSATIONS: That for the
Honorary Services to REIN, AIG will be compensated as follows:
i. AIG will be paid 10% of the appropriate percentage of the total money set aside
every month out of the OPD collection at the REIN;
ii. AIG will also be paid 10% of the appropriate percentage of the total money set
aside every month out of the Operation Fee component of the Hospitalization Bills
collected by REIN from the Institute patients;
iii. AIG will also be entitled to 10% of the appropriate percentage of the total money
set aside every month out of the Room Visiting Fees component of the
Hospitalization Bills collected by REIN from the Institute patients;
NOTES:
a. That the above compensations are in addition to the Honorarium as stated at
clause II above;
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
3

b. That the Patients Hospitalized under AIG's care will have to be visited by AIG for
the post-operative care.
IV. TIME DEVOTION AND DUTIES:
That the AIG will be devoting full time to the REIN to cater to the following:
i. The examination of OPD patients both in the morning and the afternoon sessions;
ii. The Operations of paying as well as non-paying Patients as per the schedules fixed
by the Institute Management;
iii. The emergency cases of all natures;
iv. Attending the routine as well as special Diagnostic and Operative Camps as
finalized by the competent authority of the Institute;
v. Participation in the R & D activities programmed and planned by the R & D
Department of the Institute;
vi. Presenting research papers at the National and International Medical Conferences
on behalf of the R & D Department of the Institute upon authorization by the
competent authority of the Institute;
vii. Training of junior doctors and other paramedical staff of the Institute to make
them competent enough to handle the cases independently.
viii. Any other assignment that might get created in course of time but not clearly
visualized at present.
V. LEAVE RULES:
That AIG will be governed by the leave rules of the Institute as in vogue from time to
time. AIG will, however, not be entitled to any financial benefit of any kind as that
might be applicable to other regular employees of the Institute as far as the leave
rules are concerned.
VI. WEEKLY OFFS AND HOLIDAYS:
i. That AIG will be entitled to weekly offs as well as public holidays as decided by the
Institute for each accounting year.
That Hon. Hospital Superintendent, however, shall have the rights to make
alterations in the same depending upon the Hospital contingencies.
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
4

ii. That AIG will be entitled to 30 days of contingency leave during each accounting
year.
VII. CONDUCT RULES:
That AIG will be governed by the conduct rules of the Institute as in vogue from time
to time and as applicable to the regular employees of the Institute.
VIII. ARBITRATION OF DISPUTES:
That the disputes, if any, arising in course of the tenure of this contract will be
referred to the Managing Committee of the Institute and the decision of the
Managing Committee will be final.
IX. TENURE OF CONTRACT:
That this contract is operative for a period of THREE YEARS effective from 1-4-96.
This period can, however, be extended from time to time with the mutual consent.
X. TERMINATION OF CONTRACT:
That a notice of clear THREE MONTHS will have to be given.
i. By REIN to AIG, if the institute wishes to terminate this contract or in lieu of notice
period the institute shall have to pay an amount (to AIG) equivalent to the Hon.
Amount paid to AIG for last three months just preceding the month of termination of
contract;
ii. By AIG to REIN, if AIG wishes to terminate this contract or in lieu of the notice
period AIG shall have to pay an amount (to REIN) equivalent to the Hon. Amount
paid to him by the Institute for the last three months just preceding the month of
termination of the contract.
NOTE: That in the event of the proven case indiscipline or breach of Trust, the REIN
reserves the right to terminate the contract at any time without giving any
compensation whatsoever.
XI. EXPIRATION OF THE PRESENT EMPLOYMENT:
That with effect from 1st April 96, AIG shall no longer remain as the regular
employee of the Institute and that the earlier appointment order No. 10795 dtd. 03-
04-1995 automatically becomes null and void.”
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
5

5. The Appellants filed a petition under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, being MACP
No.1326 of 1997, against the driver, the Respondent No. 3 and the Respondent No.1, in which they
claimed compensation for the death of Dr. Alpesh I. Gandhi at INR 1 crore. The petition stated that
Dr. Gandhi was 28 years old at the time of his death and was earning a monthly income of INR
13,000.
6. Despite being served, the Respondent No. 2 and the Respondent No. 3 chose to remain absent
before the Tribunal. The Respondent No. 1 filed its written statement where it denied the material
averments made by the Appellants and, in addition, submitted that the deceased being an employee
of the hospital was not covered for death or injury arising out of and in the course of his
employment, thereby excluding the liability of the insurance company altogether in the case. The
Tribunal framed the following issues and answered them as follows:
“1. Whether the applicants prove that the deceased died due to the rash and negligent
driving on the part of the driver, opponent No.1 of the vehicle involved in the
accident?
2. Whether the applicants are entitled to get compensation? If yes, what amount and
from whom?
2-A Whether the claimant prove that the risk of the deceased is covered in the policy issued to the
hospital?
2-B Whether the opponent No.3 proves that the risk of the deceased is not covered in the policy,
because of the deceased being an employee of the hospital and the death is caused during the course
of employment as the Sec-II of the terms and conditions of the policy exclude such risk ?
3. What award and order?
My findings to the above issues are as under for the reasons to follow: -
1. In the affirmative.
2. In the affirmative. As per finding.
2-A In the affirmative.
2-B In the negative
3. As per final order.”
7. By way of findings of fact, it found that the driving license in favour of the driver was valid, and
that the driver was rash and negligent in driving the vehicle, which led to the death of Dr. Alpesh
Gandhi. The Tribunal then found that the said Doctor was earning an annual income of INR
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
6

1,47,000. Following Sarla Verma v. DTC (2009) 6 SCC 121, the Tribunal, after considering
deductions as well as future prospects, ultimately arrived at an income figure of INR 18,275 as the
monthly income. The Tribunal then applied the multiplier of ‘17’ to the annual income of INR
2,19,300, making a total of INR 37,28,100/-. Consortium expenses were added as INR 25,000;
Funeral expenses as INR 10,000, thereby arriving at a total compensation figure of INR 37,63,100
which had to be paid together with interest at 8% per annum. Importantly, all three Respondents
were made jointly and severally liable to pay the aforesaid amount. This was on the basis that on an
analysis of the contract entered into between the Respondent No. 3 and Dr. Alpesh Gandhi, the
contract was a contract for service, as a result of which the deceased could not have been held to
have been in the employment of the Respondent No. 3.
8. The impugned judgment of the High Court dated 26.07.2018, after analyzing the provisions of the
contract for services dated 04.05.1996 between the Respondent No. 3 and Dr. Gandhi came to the
opposite conclusion, stating that since the contract was a contract of service, the Insurance
Company could not be held liable except to the extent of INR 50,000, which was arrived at after
setting out Regulation 27 of the General Regulations of the Indian Motor Tariffs dated 01.08.1989,
by which the maximum cover for policies of the kind involved in this case to third persons where the
premium paid is INR 25 per person, in addition to the premium paid for the policy, the capital sum
insured per person would only be INR 50,000. Thus, the liability of the Insurance Company was
pegged to INR 50,000, the liability of the Respondent No. 2 and the Respondent No. 3 being for the
balance amount.
9. The vexed question that arises for consideration is as to whether Dr. Alpesh Gandhi could have
been said to have been in the employ of the Respondent No. 3 on the date of the accident, as a result
of which the limitation of liability provision in favour of the Respondent No. 1 as set out hereinabove
would kick in.
10. Shri Vikas Kochar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants, has taken us through
the contract between Dr. Gandhi and the Respondent No. 3 and has emphasised that the contract is
one for services, and that an honorarium of INR 4000 per month is paid. Further, Dr. Gandhi will
not be entitled to any financial benefits as might be applicable to other regular employees so far as
the leave rules are concerned, making it clear that Dr. Gandhi is not, therefore, a regular employee
of the Respondent No.3. He also emphasised the fact that Dr. Gandhi no longer remains as a regular
employee of the institute with the coming into force of this new arrangement between the parties.
He then placed reliance on Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. v. State of Saurashtra 1957 SCR
158 and National Insurance Company Limited v. Balakrishnan (2013) 1 SCC 731.
11. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 1 has supported the judgment of the
High Court, stating that on a holistic reading of the agreement between the Respondent No. 3 and
Dr. Alpesh Gandhi, dated 04.05.1996, the contract is one of service and not for service. Even
otherwise, the learned counsel argued that the High Court was wrong in stating that the insured was
covered by endorsement IMT-5, by which personal accident cover to unnamed passengers other
than the insured and his paid driver or cleaner will be extended to the extent of 100% where death is
caused, on payment of an additional premium. The learned counsel states that IMT-5 would not be
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
7

applicable in the facts of this case, but that IMT-16 would be applicable. Since additional premium
has not been paid to apply IMT- 16, the Insurance Company is not liable to indemnify the insured in
respect of any liability arising for death sustained by an employee in respect of the accident in
connection with the motor vehicle in question.
12. This Court has in a series of judgment indicated the tests to be followed in order to determine, in
the context of the Industrial Disputes Act and the Factories Act, as to whether different kinds of
persons who supply goods or services could be said to be “in the employ” of the employer. Thus, in
Dharangadhara (supra), the question posed before the Court was whether the salt manufactured by
a class of professional laborers, known as agarias, from rain water that got mixed with saline matter
in the soil, could be said to be in pursuance of contracts of service with the appellant, as a result of
which they would then be entitled to be treated as workmen under the Industrial Disputes Act. After
setting out the definition of “workman” under Section 2(s) of the said Act, this Court referred to the
earliest test laid down to distinguish between a contract of service and a contract for service, namely,
that whereas in the latter case, the master can order or require what is to be done, in the former
case, he can not only order or require what is to be done, but also how it shall be done. After
referring to a number of English judgments, the Court then held, giving the example of a ship’s
master, a chauffeur, and a reporter on the staff of a newspaper as against a ship’s pilot, a taxi man
and a newspaper contributor, that the test would be whether work is done as an integral part of the
business of the employer, in which case it would be a contract of service, or whether it was done as
an accessory to such business, in which case it would be a contract for service. Other tests that were
laid down were as to whether the master had the power to select the servant, whether he paid wages
or other remuneration, whether the master had the right to control the method of doing the work,
and whether the master had the right to suspend or dismiss the employee. Ultimately, the true test,
according to the judgment, was held to be as follows:
“The principle which emerges from these authorities is that the prima facie test for
the determination of the relationship between master and servant is the existence of
the right in the master to supervise and control the work done by the servant not only
in the matter of directing what work the servant is to do but also the manner in which
he shall do his work, or to borrow the words of Lord Uthwatt at p. 23 in Mersey
Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. [(1952) SCR 696,
702] “The proper test is whether or not the hirer had authority to control the manner
of execution of the act in question.
The nature or extent of control which is requisite to establish the relationship of
employer and employee must necessarily vary from business to business and is by its
very nature incapable of precise definition. As has been noted above, recent
pronouncements of the Court of Appeal in England have even expressed the view that
it is not necessary for holding that a person is an employee, that the employer should
be proved to have exercised control over his work, that the test of control was not one
of universal application and that there were many contracts in which the master
could not control the manner in which the work was done (Vide observations of
Somervelle, L.J. in Cassidy v. Ministry of Health, (supra), and Denning, L.J. in
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
8

Stevenson, Jordan and Harrison Ltd. v. Macdonald and Evans, (supra).” Ultimately,
the Court held that it would be a question of fact to be decided by all the
circumstances of the case. It was further held that the mere fact that the agarias did
piece-rated labour, the work being seasonal, and the fact that they can engage others
to do the work for them, would not detract from the fact that they are professional
labourers who have been hired by the employer. Finally, the Court refused to exercise
its discretion to interfere with the Industrial Tribunal’s finding that on the facts of the
case these agarias would have to be considered as workmen under the Industrial
Disputes Act.
13. In Chintaman Rao v. State of M.P. 1958 SCR 1340, this Court held that Sattedars and their
coolies were not workers within the meaning of Section 2(1) of the Factories Act. In so holding, the
Court referred to the judgment of Dharangadhara (supra) and held that the fact that bidi rolling was
done outside the factory premises, and that such rolling can be done at any time that the Sattedar
chooses clinched the issue in favour of the fact that Sattedars and their coolies were independent
contractors. The court then hedged its decision by stating that it was not intended to lay down that
under no circumstances can a Sattedar be considered to be a worker within the meaning of the
Factories Act. Ultimately, everything depends on the terms of the contract entered into between
such person and the employer.
14. In Birdhichand Sharma v. First Civil Judge (1961) 3 SCR 24, this Court found on facts that the
persons employed in a bidi factory, who could work at the time they chose, on a piece-rated basis,
the caveat being that if they came after mid-day they were not allowed to work, even though the
factory closed at 7 PM, that such persons were workers under the Factories Act. The earlier two
judgments of this court were discussed and emphasis was laid on the fact that the persons who were
employed had to work within the factory premises and had to report to work before mid-day.
Further, the “right of control” was extended to mean that so long as there is some amount of
supervision by the management, inasmuch as the management has the right to reject the bidis
prepared if they do not come up to the proper standard, would indicate that such persons would be
workers.
15. In Shankar Balaji Waje v. State of Maharashtra 1962 Supp (1) SCR 24, this Court set out the
established facts between one Pandurang, who was employed by the owner of a factory
manufacturing bidis, and the employer, as follows:
“The first contention is based on the established facts of the case which, it is
submitted, do not make out the relationship of master and servant between the
appellant and Pandurang, inasmuch as they indicate that the appellant had no
supervision and control over the details of the work Pandurang did in the factory. The
following are the established facts:
(1) There was no agreement or contract of service between the appellant and
Pandurang. (2) Pandurang was not bound to attend the factory for the work of rolling
bidis for any fixed hours of work or for any fixed period. He was free to go to the
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
9

factory at any time he liked and was equally free to leave the factory whenever he
liked. Of course, he could be in the factory during the hours of working of the factory.
(3) Pandurang could be absent from work on any day he liked. He could be absent up
to ten days without even informing the appellant. If he was to be absent for more
than ten days he had to inform the appellant, not for the purpose of taking his
permission or leave, but for the purpose of assuring the appellant that he had no
intention to give up work at the factory. (4) There was no actual supervision of the
work Pandurang did in the factory.
(5) Pandurang was paid at fixed rates on the quantity of bidis turned out. There was
however no stipulation that he had to turn out any minimum quantity of bidis in a
day.
(6) Leaves used to be supplied to Pandurang for being taken home and cut there.
Tobacco to fill the bidis used to be supplied at the Factory. Pandurang was not bound
to roll the bidis at the factory. He could do so at his place, on taking permission from
the appellant for taking tobacco home. The permission was necessary in view of
Excise Rules and not on account of any condition of alleged service.
(7) At the close of the day, the bidis used to be delivered to the appellant and bidis not
up to the standard, used to be rejected.” On these facts, the judgment in Birdhichand
(supra) was distinguished and that of Chintaman Rao (supra) applied. The Court
held:
“Further, the facts of the case indicate that the appellant had no control and
supervision over the details of Pandurang's work. He could not control his hours of
work. He could not control his days of work. Pandurang was free to absent himself
and was free to go to the factory at any time and to leave it at any time according to
his will. The appellant could not insist on any particular minimum quantity of bidis
to be turned out per day. He could not control the time spent by Pandurang on the
rolling of a bidi or a number of bidis. The work of rolling bidis may be a simple work
and may require no particular supervision and direction during the process of
manufacture. But there is nothing on record to show that any such direction could be
given.
xxx xxx xxx It is true, as contended for the State, that persons engaged to roll bidis on
job work basis could be workers, but only such persons would be workers who work
regularly at the factory and are paid for the work turned out during their regular
employment on the basis of the work done. Piece-rate workers can be workers within
the definition of ‘worker’ in the Act, but they must be regular workers and not
workers who come and work according to their sweet will. It is also true, as urged for
the State, that a worker, within the definition of that expression in the Act, need not
be a whole-time worker. But, even then, the worker must have, under his contract of
service, an obligation to work either for a fixed period or between fixed hours. The
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
10

whole conception of service does not fit in well with a servant who has full liberty to
attend to his work according to his pleasure and not according to the orders of his
master.
We may say that this opinion further finds support from what we hold on the second
contention. If Pandurang was a worker, the provisions about; leave and leave wages
should apply to him. We are of opinion that they do not and what we say in that
connection reinforces our view that Pandurang was not a worker as the three criteria
and conditions laid down in Shri Chintaman Rao case [1958 SCR 1340] for
constituting him as such are not fulfilled in the present case.”
16. In D.C. Dewan Mohideen Sahib and Sons v. Secretary, United Beedi Workers' Union (1964) 7
SCR 646, the Court set out a sample agreement which disclosed the facts of the case before it, as
follows:
“It seems that a sample agreement was produced before the High Court, which
provided inter alia for the following terms:
(1) That the proprietor should supply the tobacco and the bidi leaves;
(2) that the intermediary should engage premises of his own and obtain the requisite
licence to carry on the work of having the bidis rolled there; (3) that at no time should
more than nine bidi rollers work in the premises of that intermediary;
(4) that the intermediary should meet all the incidental charges for rolling the bidis
including the cost of thread and the remuneration paid to the bidi rollers;
(5) that for every unit of 1000 bidis rolled and delivered by the intermediary to the
proprietor, the latter should pay the stipulated amount, after deducting the cost of
the tobacco and the bidi leaves supplied by the proprietor;
(6) that the intermediary should not enter into similar engagement with any other
industrial concern; (7) that the price of the raw materials and price to be paid for
every unit of 1000 bidis rolled and delivered were to be fixed at the discretion of the
proprietor.
Besides these conditions, the contract also provided that it was liable to termination on breach of
any of the conditions, and that the proprietors had no connection with and that they assumed no
responsibility for the bidi workers who had to look to the intermediary for what was payable to them
for rolling the bidis.” The earlier judgments of this Court were referred to. After applying the tests
laid down in the said judgments, this Court found:
“There is in our opinion little doubt that this system has been evolved to avoid
regulations under the Factories Act. Further there is also no doubt from whatever
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
11

terms of agreement are available on the record that the so-called independent
contractors have really no independence at all. As the appeal court has pointed out
they are impecunious persons who could hardly afford to have factories of their own.
Some of them are even ex-employees of the appellants. The contract is practically
one-sided in that the proprietor can at his choice supply the raw materials or refuse
to do so, the so-called contractor having no right to insist upon the supply of raw
materials to him. The so-called independent contractor is even bound not to employ
more than nine persons in his so-called factory. The sale of raw materials to the
so-called independent contractor and resale by him of the manufactured bidis is also
a mere camouflage, the nature of which is apparent from the fact that the so-called
contractor never paid for the materials. All that happens is that when the
manufactured bidis are delivered by him to the appellants, amounts due for the
so-called sale of raw materials is deducted from the so-called price fixed for the bidis.
In effect all that happened is that the so-called independent contractor is supplied
with tobacco and leaves and is paid certain amounts for the wages of the workers
employed and for his own trouble. We can therefore see no difficulty in holding that
the so-called contractor is merely an employee or an agent of the appellants as held
by the appeal court and as such employee or agent he employs workers to roll bidis
on behalf of the appellants. The work is distributed between a number of so-called
independent contractors who are told not to employ more than nine persons at one
place to avoid regulations under the Factories Act. We are not however concerned
with that aspect of the matter in the present appeals. But there can be no doubt that
the workers employed by the so-called contractors are really the workmen of the
appellants who are employed through their agents or servants whom they choose to
call independent contractors.”
17. The next case in chronological order is of seminal importance in deciding which side of the line a
particular set of facts would lead to a conclusion that a contract is one for service or of service. Thus,
in Silver Jubilee Tailoring House v. Chief Inspector of Shops & Establishments (1974) 3 SCC 498,
this Court had to determine whether there is a relationship of employer and an employee between a
tailoring shop and persons employed by the owner of the shop for stitching purposes under Section
2(14) of the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Shops and Establishments Act, 1951. Section 2(14) of
the said Act defined a ‘person employed’ as meaning, in the case of a shop, a person wholly or
principally employed therein in connection with the business of the shop. The facts were set out in
paragraph 7 of the said judgment as follows:
“7. The following facts appear from the finding of the learned Single Judge. All the
workers are paid on piece-rate basis. The Workers generally attend the shops every
day if there is work. The rate of wages paid to the workers is not uniform. The rate
depends upon the skill of the worker and the nature of the work. When cloth is given
for stitching to a worker after it has been cut, the worker is told how he should stitch
it. If he does not stitch it according to the instruction, the employer rejects the work
and he generally asks the worker to restitch the same. When the work is not done by a
worker according to the instructions, generally no further work would be given to
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
12

him. If a worker does not want to go for work to the shop on a day, he does not make
any application for leave, nor is there any obligation on his part to inform the
employer that he will not attend for work on that day. If there is no work, the
employee is free to leave the shop before the shop closes. Almost all the workers work
in the shop. Some workers are allowed to take cloth for stitching to their homes on
certain days. But this is done always with the permission of the proprietor of the
shop. The machines installed in the shop belong to the proprietor of the shop and the
premises and the shop in which the work is carried on also belong to him.” After
referring to several judgments of this Court, the Court then referred to judgments of
the English and American Courts as follows:
“19. In Cassidy v. Ministry of Health [(1951) 1 All ER 574, 579] Lord Justice
Sommerwell pointed out that the test of control of the manner of work is not
universally correct, that there are many contracts of service where the master cannot
control the manner in which the work is to be done as in the case of a Captain of a
ship.
20. In many skilled employments, to apply the test of control over the manner of
work for deciding the question whether the relationship of master and servant exists
would be unrealistic.
21. In Montreal v. Montreal Locomotive Works Ltd. etc. [(1947) 1 DLR 161 at p. 1969]
Lord Wright said that a single test, such as the presence or absence of control, was
often relied on to determine whether the case was one of master and servant, mostly
in order to decide issues of tortious liability on the part of the master or superior and
that in the more complex conditions of modern industry, more complicated tests
have often to be applied. He said that it would be more appropriate to apply a
complex test involving: (i) control; (ii) ownership of the tools; (iii) chance of profit;
(iv) risk of loss, and that control in itself is not always conclusive. He further said that in many cases
the question can only be settled by examining the whole of the various elements which constitute the
relationship between the parties.
22. In Bank Voor Handel en Scheepvaart N.V. v. Slatford [(1952) 2 All ER 956 at 971] Denning, L.J.,
said:
“... the test of being a servant does not rest nowadays on submission to orders. It
depends on whether the person is part and parcel of the organisation....”
23. In U.S. v. Silk [331 US 704] the question was whether men working for the plaintiffs, Silk and
Greyvan, were ‘employees’ within the meaning of that word in the Social Security Act, 1935. The
Judges of the Supreme Court of U.S.A., agreed upon the test to be applied, though not in every
instance upon its application to the facts. They said that the test was not “the common law test,” viz
“power of control, whether exercised or not, over the manner of performing service to the
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
13

undertaking”, but whether the men were employees “as a matter of economic reality”. Important
factors were said to be “the degrees of control, opportunities of profit or loss, investment in facilities,
permanency of relations and skill required in the claimed independent operation”.
xxx xxx xxx
25. In Market Investigations Ltd. v. Minister of Social Security [(1968) 3 All ER 732] the Court said:
“I think it is fair to say that there was at one time a school of thought according to
which the extent and degree of the control which B. was entitled to exercise over A. in
the performance of the work would be a decisive factor. However, it has for long been
apparent that an analysis of the extent and degree of such control is not in itself
decisive.”
26. It is in its application to skilled and particularly professional work that control test in its
traditional form has really broken down. It has been said that in interpreting “Control” as meaning
the power to direct how the servant should do his work, the Court has been applying a concept
suited to a past age.
“This distinction (viz., between telling a servant what to do and telling him how to do it) was based
upon the social conditions of an earlier age; it assumed that the employer of labour was able to
direct and instruct the labourer as to the technical methods he should use in performing his work. In
a mainly agricultural society and even in the earlier stages of the Industrial Revolution the master
could be expected to be superior to the servant in the knowledge, skill and experience which had to
be brought to bear upon the choice and handling of the tools. The control test was well suited to
govern relationships like those between a farmer and an agricultural labourer (prior to agricultural
mechanization) a craftsman and a journeyman, a householder and a domestic servant, and even a
factory owner and an unskilled ‘hand’. It reflects a state of society in which the ownership of the
means of production coincided with the profession of technical knowledge and skill in which that
knowledge and skill was largely acquired by being handed down from one generation to the next by
oral tradition and not by being systematically imparted in institutions of learning from universities
down to technical schools. The control test postulates a combination of managerial and technical
functions in the person of the employer i.e. what to modern eyes appears as an imperfect division of
labour. [ See Prof. Kahn-Freund in (1951), 14 Modern Law Review, at p. 505] ”
27. It is, therefore, not surprising that in recent years the control test as traditionally formulated has
not been treated as an exclusive test.
28. It is exceedingly doubtful today whether the search for a formula in the nature of a single test to
tell a contract of service from a contract for service will serve any useful purpose. The most that
profitably can be done is to examine all the factors that have been referred to in the cases on the
topic. Clearly, not all of these factors would be relevant in all these cases or have the same weight in
all cases. It is equally clear that no magic formula can be propounded, which factors should in any
case be treated as determining ones. The plain fact is that in a large number of cases, the Court can
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
14

only perform a balancing operation weighing up the factors which point in one direction and
balancing them against those pointing in the opposite direction [ See Atiyah, PS. “Vicarious Liability
in the Law of Torts”, pp. 37-38] .
29. During the last two decades the emphasis in the field has shifted and no longer rests so strongly
upon the question of control. Control is obviously an important factor and in many cases it may still
be the decisive factor. But it is wrong to say that in every case it is decisive. It is now no more than a
factor, although an important one [See Argent v. Minister of Social Security and Another, (1968) 1
WLR 1749 at 1759].” Ultimately, the Court found that two important considerations clinched the
issue in favour of deciding that the persons employed were employed wholly or principally in
connection with the business of the shop. First and foremost, machines on which sewing took place
were supplied by the proprietor of the shop. And, secondly, supervision and control in tailoring
business terms would include the right to reject sub- standard work. These factors were held to
outweigh the fact that such persons did not have to work exclusively for the owner of the shop as
also that they are not obliged to work for the full day.
18. In Hussainbhai v. Alath Factory Thezhilali Union (1978) 4 SCC 257, this Court was confronted
with persons who are engaged to make ropes from within a factory which manufactured ropes. What
was argued before the Court was that the workmen were not the employer’s workmen but only the
contractor’s workmen. The question that came up for consideration was whether they are
“workmen” within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The test applied by
this judgment to find out whether such persons are “workmen” was as follows:
“5. The true test may, with brevity, be indicated once again. Where a worker or group
of workers labours to produce goods or services and these goods or services are for
the business of another, that other is, in fact, the employer. He has economic control
over the workers' subsistence, skill, and continued employment. If he, for any reason,
chokes off, the worker is, virtually, laid off. The presence of intermediate contractors
with whom alone the workers have immediate or direct relationship ex contractu is of
no consequence when, on lifting the veil or looking at the conspectus of factors
governing employment, we discern the naked truth, though draped in different
perfect paper arrangement, that the real employer is the Management, not the
immediate contractor. Myriad devices, half-hidden in fold after fold of legal form
depending on the degree of concealment needed, the type of industry, the local
conditions and the like may be resorted to when labour legislation casts welfare
obligations on the real employer, based on Articles 38, 39, 42, 43 and 43-A of the
Constitution. The court must be astute to avoid the mischief and achieve the purpose
of the law and not be misled by the maya of legal appearances.” Applying this test, the
economic reality of control of the employer over the workman’s subsistence, skill and
continued employment pointed to such persons being direct employees of the owner.
19. In Shining Tailors v. Industrial Tribunal II, U.P. (1983) 4 SCC 464, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court
followed Silver Jubilee (supra) to arrive at the conclusion that the persons employed were
“workmen” within the meaning of the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
15

20. In P.M. Patel & Sons v. Union of India (1986) 1 SCC 32, this Court was faced with the important
question as to whether the workers employed at their homes in the manufacture of bidis are entitled
to the benefit of Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. After
referring to the earlier judgments of this Court, this Court held that the Silver Jubilee case (supra)
made the law take a major shift from the earlier judgments on criteria to be applied to determine
relationship of master and servant, and pointed out that the right of rejection of sub-standard bidis
can constitute, in itself, an effective degree of supervision and control, so as to render a finding that
such persons are “employees” within the meaning of Section 2 of the said Act.
21. In Indian Banks Assn. v. Workmen of Syndicate Bank (2001) 3 SCC 36, this Court after referring
to Silver Jubilee (supra) found that Deposit Collectors employed by specified banks were entitled to
be treated as workmen. The court held:
“26. We also cannot accept the submission that the banks have no control over the
Deposit Collectors. Undoubtedly, the Deposit Collectors are free to regulate their own
hours of work, but that is because of the nature of the work itself. It would be
impossible to fix working hours for such Deposit Collectors because they have to go to
various depositors. This would have to be done at the convenience of the depositors
and at such times as required by the depositors. If this is so, then no time can be fixed
for such work. However, there is control inasmuch as the Deposit Collectors have to
bring the collections and deposit the same in the banks by the very next day. They
have then to fill in various forms, accounts, registers and passbooks. They also have
to do such other clerical work as the Bank may direct. They are, therefore,
accountable to the Bank and under the control of the Bank.”
22. In Indian Overseas Bank v. Workmen (2006) 3 SCC 729, the question was whether the banks
who employed jewel appraisers for loans were “workmen” within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the
Industrial Disputes Act. After distinguishing the Indian Banks case (supra), this Court referred to
Dharangadhara (supra), Silver Jubilee (supra), Shining Tailors (supra) and Chintaman Rao (supra)
and then held:
“17. The inferences culled out from the reading of those judgments can be summed
up as follows:
(a) Where the contractors were substantially responsible for the main and sole
business, they would be treated as workers.
(b) One exception is that where in such cases flexibility of the contract was at
variance with the normal worker's contract, the contractors would not be treated as
workers.
(c) Where the contractor is in the nature of supplier of goods and services, they are to
be treated as supplier contractors and not workmen.
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
16

18. At this juncture the distinction between jewel appraisers and the regular employees of the Bank
can be noted.
             Regular employees                       Jewel appraisers
             1.      Subject     to                  1.                 No
             qualification and age                   qualification/age.
             prescribed.
             2.       Recruitment                    2.           Direct
             through employ-ment                     engagement by the
             exchange/Banking                        local Manager.
             Service Recruitment
             Board.
             3.   Fixed      working                 3. No fixed working
             hours.                                  hours.
             4. Monthly wages.                       4. No guaranteed
                                                     payment,      only
                                                     commission paid.
             5.       Subject      to                5. No disciplinary
             disciplinary control.                   control.
             6. Control/supervision                  6.                No
             is exercised not only                   control/supervision
             with regard to the                      over the nature of
             allocation of work, but                 work      to      be
             also the way in which                   performed.
             the work is to be
             carried out.
             7. Wages are paid by                    7. Charges are paid
             the Bank.                               by the borrowers.
             8. Retirement age.                      8. No     retirement
                                                     age.
             9. Subject to transfer.                 9. No transfer.
             10.      While     in                   10. No bar to carry
             employment     cannot                   on any avocation or
             carry on any other                      occupation.
             occupation.
Therefore, the jewel appraisers are not employees of the Bank."
23. At this stage, it is important to advert to a fairly recent judgment of the English Court of Appeal
in E v. English Province of Our Lady of Charity and Anr. 2012 EWCA Civ 938. In the aforesaid case,
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
17

a question arose as to whether the Roman Catholic Church would be vicariously liable in a claim
brought for damages alleging that a lady, when she had been resident in a children’s home operated
by a Roman Catholic order of nuns, had been sexually abused by a priest appointed by the diocesan
bishop. Under the sub-heading “The hallmarks of the relationship of employer and employee” the
court referred to various earlier English judgments and the tests laid down as follows:
“64. I indicated early on at para 21, vicarious liability tended to depend on the
difference between employee and independent contractor. If, as I believe, it is
necessary to attempt to capture the essence of what it is that makes a man an
employee, I must examine those differences in more detail. Generally speaking, an
employee works under the supervision and direction of his employer: an independent
contractor is his own master bound by his contract but not by his employers orders.
An employee works for his employer: an independent contractor is in business on his
own account. In Ready Mixed Concrete (South East) Ltd v Minister of Pensions and
National Insurance [1968] 2 QB 497 (a case which I observe with envy occupied the
court for six days whilst we were allowed one only), MacKenna J said, at p 515, that a
contract of service exists if these three conditions are fulfilled:
“(i) The servant agrees that, in consideration of a wage or other remuneration, he will
provide his own work and skill in the performance of some service for his master. (ii)
He agrees, expressly or impliedly, that in the performance of that service he will be
subject to the others control in a sufficient degree to make that other master. (iii) The
other provisions of the contract are consistent with its being a contract of service.” He
elaborated:
“Control includes the power of deciding the thing to be done, the way in which it shall
be done, the means to be employed in doing it, the time when and the place where it
shall be done. All these aspects of control must be considered in deciding whether the
right exists in a sufficient degree to make one party the master and the other his
servant.” Later, at p 524, he commented on Lord Thankerton’s “four indicia” of a
contract of service, said in Short v J & W Henderson Ltd (1946) 62 TLR 427, 429 to
be: “(a) The master’s power of selection of his servant; (b) the payment of wages or
other remuneration; (c) the master’s right to control the method of doing the work;
and (d) the master’s right of suspension or dismissal.” MacKenna J said:
“It seems to me that (a) and (d) are chiefly relevant in determining whether there is a
contract of any kind between the supposed master and servant, and that they are of
little use in determining whether the contract is one of service. The same is true of
(b), unless one distinguishes between different methods of payment, payment by
results tending to prove independence and payment by time the relation of master
and servant.”
65. That leaves control as an important distinguishing factor. The example is often
given of the difference between the chauffeur and the taxi driver but it is not always
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
18

as easy as that. As times have changed so control has become an unrealistic guide. It
may have been more meaningful when work was done by labourers under the
direction of employers who had the same or greater technical skills than their
workmen. Now that one is frequently dealing with a professional person or a person
of some particular skill and experience, for example a brain surgeon, there can be no
question of the employer telling him how to do his work for in truth the skilled
person is engaged for the very reason that he possesses skills which the employer
lacks. The emphasis placed on control has thus been reduced. As Roskill J said in
Argent v Minister of Social Security [1968] 1 WLR 1749, 1758— 1759:
“in the earlier cases it seems to have been suggested that the most important test, if
not the all-important test, was the extent of the control exercised by the employer
over the servant. If one goes back to some of the cases in the first decade of this
century, one sees that that was regarded almost as the conclusive test. But it is also
clear that as one watches the development of the law in the first 60 years of this
century and particularly the development of the law in the last 15 or 20 years in this
field, the emphasis has shifted and no longer rests so strongly upon the question of
control. Control is obviously an important factor. In some cases it may still be the
decisive factor, but it wrong to say that in every case it is the decisive factor. It is now,
as I venture to think, no more than a factor albeit a very important one.” Roskill J's
test was, at p 1760:
“Finally it has been more recently suggested that the matter can be determined by
reference to what in modern parlance was called economic reality. All these are
matters which have to be borne in mind. To my mind, no single one is decisive. One
has to look at the totality of the evidence, at the totality of the facts found and then
apply them to the language of the statute. One cannot do better than echo the words
of Somervell LJ in Cassidy v Ministry of Health [1951] 2 KB 343 , 352: ‘one perhaps
cannot get much beyond this: “was his contract a contract of service within the
meaning which an ordinary person would give to the words?”’” Roskill J also referred
to Denning LJ's views expressed in Stevenson Jordan & Harrison Ltd v Macdonald &
Evans [1952] 1 TLR 101 , 111 and Bank voor Handel en Scheepvaart NV v Slatford (No
2) [1953] 1 QB 248 , 295. In the former Denning LJ said:
“One feature which seems to run through the instances is that, under a contract of
service, a man is employed as part of the business, and his work is done as an integral
part of the business; whereas, under a contract for services, his work, although done
for the business, is not integrated into it but is only accessory to it.”
67. The Privy Council in the Lee Ting Sang case did, however, give this help [1990] 2
AC 374, 382:
“What then is the standard to apply? This has proved to be a most elusive question
and despite a plethora of authorities the courts have not been able to devise a single
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
19

test that will conclusively point to the distinction in all cases. Their Lordships agree
with the Court of Appeal when they said that the matter had never been better put
than by Cooke J in Market Investigations Ltd v Minister of Social Security [1969] 2
QB 173 , 184– 185: ‘The fundamental test to be applied is this: “is the person who has
engaged himself to perform these services performing them as a person in business
on his own account?” If the answer to that question is “yes”, then the contract is a
contract for services. If the answer is “no”, then the contract is a contract of service.
No exhaustive list has been compiled and perhaps no exhaustive list can be compiled
of the considerations which are relevant in determining that question, nor can strict
rules be laid down as to the relative weight which the various considerations should
carry in particular cases. The most that can be said is that control will no doubt
always have to be considered, although it can no longer be regarded as the sole
determining factor; and that factors which may be of importance are such matters as
whether the man performing the services provides his own equipment, whether he
hires his own helpers, what degree of financial risk he takes, what degree of
responsibility for investment and management he has, and whether and how far he
has an opportunity of profiting from sound management in the performance of his
task.’”
68. To much the same effect is an earlier Privy Council case, Montreal v Montreal
Locomotive Works Ltd [1947] 1 DLR 161 , where Lord Wright said, at p 169:
“In earlier cases a single test, such as the presence or absence of control, was often
relied on to determine whether the case was one of master and servant, mostly in
order to decide issues of tortious liability on the part of the master or superior. In the
more complex conditions of modern industry, more complicated tests have to be
applied. It has been suggested that a fourfold test would in some cases be more
appropriate, a complex involving (1) control; (2) ownership of the tools; (3) chance of
profit; (4) risk of loss. Control in itself is not always conclusive.” He went on to say
that:
“it is in some cases possible to decide the issue by raising as the crucial question
whose business is it, or in other words by asking whether the party is carrying on the
business, in the sense of carrying it on for himself or on his own behalf and not
merely for a superior.”
69. There being no single test, what one has to do is marshal various tests which
should cumulatively point either towards an employer/employee relationship or
away from one. Adopting that approach confirms that which is accepted as the
common ground, namely, that Father Baldwin is not a true employee. The test may
yet be useful to see whether he can be said to be an independent contractor, for if he
is, the law is clear:
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
20

the employer is not vicariously liable for the torts of his independent contractor. I am
satisfied that Father Baldwin is no more a true independent contractor than he is an
employee. For a start, he has no contractual relationship with his bishop. He is hardly
a person in business on his own account with a free hand to carry out the job, if it is a
job, as and when he wishes.” In concluding that the Church would be vicariously
liable, the Court then held:
“81. The result of each of the tests leads me to the conclusion that Father Baldwin is
more like an employee than an independent contractor. He is in a relationship with
his bishop which is close enough and so akin to employer/employee as to make it just
and fair to impose vicarious liability. Justice and fairness is used here as a salutary
check on the conclusion. It is not a stand alone test for a conclusion. It is just because
it strikes a proper balance between the unfairness to the employer of imposing strict
liability and the unfairness to the victim of leaving her without a full remedy for the
harm caused by the employer's managing his business in a way which gave rise to
that harm even when the risk of harm is not reasonably foreseeable.”
24. A conspectus of all the aforesaid judgments would show that in a society which has moved away
from being a simple agrarian society to a complex modern society in the computer age, the earlier
simple test of control, whether or not actually exercised, has now yielded more complex tests in
order to decide complex matters which would have factors both for and against the contract being a
contract of service as against a contract for service. The early ‘control of the employer’ test in the
sense of controlling not just the work that is given but the manner in which it is to be done obviously
breaks down when it comes to professionals who may be employed. A variety of cases come in
between cases which are crystal clear - for example, a master in a school who is employed like other
employees of the school and who gives music lessons as part of his employment, as against an
independent professional piano player who gives music lessons to persons who visit her premises.
Equally, a variety of cases arise between a ship’s master, a chauffeur and a staff reporter, as against a
ship’s pilot, a taxi driver and a contributor to a newspaper, in order to determine whether the person
employed could be said to be an employee or an independent professional. The control test, after
moving away from actual control of when and how work is to be performed to the right to exercise
control, is one in a series of factors which may lead to an answer on the facts of a case slotting such
case either as a contract of service or a contract for service. The test as to whether the person
employed is integrated into the employer’s business or is a mere accessory thereof is another
important test in order to determine on which side of the line the contract falls. The three-tier test
laid down by some of the English judgments, namely, whether wage or other remuneration is paid
by the employer; whether there is a sufficient degree of control by the employer and other factors
would be a test elastic enough to apply to a large variety of cases. The test of who owns the assets
with which the work is to be done and/or who ultimately makes a profit or a loss so that one may
determine whether a business is being run for the employer or on one’s own account, is another
important test when it comes to work to be performed by independent contractors as against
piece-rated labourers. Also, the economic reality test laid down by the U.S decisions and the test of
whether the employer has economic control over the workers’ subsistence, skill and continued
employment can also be applied when it comes to whether a particular worker works for himself or
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
21

for his employer. The test laid down by the Privy Council in Lee Ting Sang v. Chung Chi-Keung
[1990] 2 A.C. 374, namely, is the person who has engaged himself to perform services performing
them as a person in business on his own account, is also an important test, this time from the point
of view of the person employed, in order to arrive at the correct solution. No one test of universal
application can ever yield the correct result. It is a conglomerate of all applicable tests taken on the
totality of the fact situation in a given case that would ultimately yield, particularly in a complex
hybrid situation, whether the contract to be construed is a contract of service or a contract for
service. Depending on the fact situation of each case, all the aforesaid factors would not necessarily
be relevant, or, if relevant, be given the same weight. Ultimately, the Court can only perform a
balancing act weighing all relevant factors which point in one direction as against those which point
in the opposite direction to arrive at the correct conclusion on the facts of each case.
25. Given the fact that this balancing process may often not yield a clear result in hybrid situations,
the context in which a finding is to be made assumes great importance. Thus, if the context is one of
a beneficial legislation being applied to weaker sections of society, the balance tilts in favour of
declaring the contract to be one of service, as was done in Dharangadhara (supra), Birdhichand
(supra), D.C.Dewan (supra), Silver Jubilee (supra), Hussainbhai (supra), Shining Tailors (supra),
P.M. Patel (supra), and Indian Banks (supra). On the other hand, where the context is that of
legislation other than beneficial legislation or only in the realm of contract, and the context of that
legislation or contract would point in the direction of the relationship being a contract for service
then, other things being equal, the context may then tilt the balance in favour of the contract being
construed to be one which is for service.
26. Looked at in this light, let us now examine the agreement between Dr. Alpesh Gandhi and the
Respondent No. 3. The factors which would lead to the contract being one for service may be
enumerated as follows:
(i) The heading of the contract itself states that it is a contract for service.
(ii) The designation of Dr. Gandhi is an Honorary Ophthalmic Surgeon.
(iii) INR 4000 per month is declared to be honorarium as opposed to salary.
(iv) In addition to INR 4000 per month, Dr. Gandhi is paid a percentage of the
earnings of the Respondent No. 3 from out of the OPD, Operation Fee component of
Hospitalization Bills, and Room Visiting Fees.
(v) The arbitration clause which speaks of disputes arising in the course of the tenure
of this contract will be referred to the Managing Committee of the Institute, the
decision of the Managing Committee being final, is also a clause which is unusual in a
pure master-servant relationship.
(vi) The fact that the appointment is contractual – for 3 years – and extendable only
by mutual consent, is another pointer to the fact that the contract is for service, which
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
22

is tenure based.
(vii) The fact that termination of the contract can be by notice on either side would
again show that the parties are dealing with each other more as equals than as
master-servant.
(viii) Clause XI of the agreement also makes it clear that the earlier appointment that
was made of Dr. Gandhi would cease the moment this contract comes into existence,
Dr. Gandhi no longer remaining as a regular employee of the Institute.
27. As against the aforesaid factors which would point to the contract the contract being a contract
for service, the following factors would point in the opposite direction:
(i) The employment is full-time. Dr. Gandhi can do no other work, and apart from the
seven types of work that Dr. Gandhi is to perform under Clause IV, any other
assignment that may get created in the course of time may also be assigned to him at
the employer’s discretion.
(ii) Dr. Gandhi is to work on all days except weekly offs and holidays that are given to
him by the employer. However, what is important is that though governed by the
leave rules of the Institute as in vogue from time to time, Dr. Gandhi will not be
entitled to any financial benefit of any kind as may be applicable to other regular
employees of the Institute under Clause V.
(iii) Dr. Gandhi will be governed by the Conduct Rules of the Institute as invoked
from time to time and as applicable to regular employees of the Institute.
(iv) That in the event of a proven case of indiscipline or breach of trust, the Institute
reserves a right to terminate the contract at any time without giving any
compensation whatsoever.
28. If the aforesaid factors are weighed in the scales, it is clear that the factors which make the
contract one for service outweigh the factors which would point in the opposite direction. First and
foremost, the intention of the parties is to be gathered from the terms of the contract. The terms of
the contract make it clear that the contract is one for service, and that with effect from the date on
which the contract begins, Dr. Gandhi shall no longer remain as a regular employee of the Institute,
making it clear that his services are now no longer as a regular employee but as an independent
professional. Secondly, the remuneration is described as honorarium, and consistent with the
position that Dr. Gandhi is an independent professional working in the Institute in his own right, he
gets a share of the spoils as has been pointed out hereinabove. Thirdly, he enters into the agreement
on equal terms as the agreement is for three years, extendable only by mutual consent of both the
parties. Fourthly, his services cannot be terminated in the usual manner of the other regular
employees of the Institute but are terminable on either side by notice. The fact that Dr. Gandhi will
devote full-time attention to the Institute is the obverse side of piece-rated work which, as has been
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
23

held in some of the judgments hereinabove, can yet amount to contracts of service, being a neutral
factor. Likewise, the fact that Dr. Gandhi must devote his entire attention to the Institute would not
necessarily lead to the conclusion that de hors all other factors the contract is one of service. Equally
important is the fact that it is necessary to state Dr. Gandhi will be governed by the Conduct Rules
and by the Leave Rules of the Institute, but by no other Rules. And even though the Leave Rules
apply to Dr. Gandhi, since he is not a regular employee, he is not entitled to any financial benefit as
might be applicable to other regular employees. Equally, arbitration of disputes between Dr. Gandhi
and the Institute being referred to the Managing Committee of the Institute would show that they
have entered into the contract not as master and servant but as employer and independent
professional. A conspectus of all the above would certainly lead to the conclusion, applying the
economic reality test, that the contract entered into between the parties is one between an Institute
and an independent professional.
29. Even otherwise, it is well-settled that exemption of liability clauses in insurance contracts are to
be construed in the case of ambiguity contra proferentum. Thus, in General Assurance Society Ltd.
v. Chandumull Jain (1966) 3 SCR 500, this Court held:
“A contract of insurance is a species of commercial transactions and there is a
well-established commercial practice to send cover notes even prior to the
completion of a proper proposal or while the proposal is being considered or a policy
is in preparation for delivery…In other respects there is no difference between a
contract of insurance and any other contract except that in a contract of insurance
there is a requirement of uberrima fides i.e. good faith on the part of the assured and
the contract is likely to be construed contra proferentem that is against the company
in case of ambiguity or doubt.”
30. This judgment has been cited with approval in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pushpalaya
Printers (2004) 3 SCC 694 as follows:
“6. The only point that arises for consideration is whether the word “impact”
contained in clause 5 of the insurance policy covers the damage caused to the
building and machinery due to driving of the bulldozer on the road close to the
building. It is evident from the terms of the insurance policy that the property was
insured as against destruction or damage to whole or part. The appellant Company
agreed to pay towards destruction or damage to the property insured to the extent of
its liability on account of various happenings. In the present case both the parties
relied on clause 5 of the insurance policy. Clause 5 is also subject to exclusions
contained in the insurance policy. That a damage caused to the building or machinery
on account of driving of vehicle on the road close to the building is not excluded.
Clause 5 speaks of “impact” by any rail/road vehicle or animal. If the appellant
Company wanted to exclude any damage or destruction caused on account of driving
of vehicle on the road close to the building, it could have expressly excluded it. The
insured possibly did not understand and expect that the destruction and damage to
the building and machinery is confined only to a direct collision by vehicle moving on
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
24

the road with the building or machinery. In the ordinary course, the question of a
vehicle directly dashing into the building or the machinery inside the building does
not arise. Further, “impact” by road vehicle found in the company of other words in
the same clause 5 normally indicates that damage caused to the building on account
of vibration by driving of vehicle close to the road is also included. In order to
interpret this clause, it is also necessary to gather the intention of the parties from the
words used in the policy. If the word “impact” is interpreted narrowly, the question of
impact by any rail would not arise as the question of a rail forcibly coming to the
contact of a building or machinery would not arise. In the absence of specific
exclusion and the word “impact” having more meanings in the context, it cannot be
confined to forcible contact alone when it includes the meanings “to drive close”,
“effective action of one thing upon another” and “the effect of such action”, it is
reasonable and fair to hold in the context that the word “impact” contained in clause
5 of the insurance policy covers the case of the respondent to say that damage caused
to the building and machinery on account of the bulldozer moving closely on the road
was on account of its “impact”. It is also settled position in law that if there is any
ambiguity or a term is capable of two possible interpretations, one beneficial to the
insured should be accepted consistent with the purpose for which the policy is taken,
namely, to cover the risk on the happening of certain event. Although there is no
ambiguity in the expression “impact”, even otherwise applying the rule of contra
preferentem, the use of the word “impact” in clause 5 in the instant policy must be
construed against the appellant. Where the words of a document are ambiguous, they
shall be construed against the party who prepared the document. This rule applies to
contracts of insurance and clause 5 of the insurance policy even after reading the
entire policy in the present case should be construed against the insurer. A
Constitution Bench of this Court in General Assurance Society Ltd. v. Chandmull Jain
[AIR 1966 SC 1644 : (1966) 3 SCR 500] has expressed that (AIR p. 1649, para 11) “in
a contract of insurance there is requirement of uberrima fides i.e. good faith on the
part of the assured and the contract is likely to be construed contra proferentem, that
is, against the company in case of ambiguity or doubt””.
31. Likewise, in Export Credit Guarantee Corpn. of India Ltd. v. Garg Sons International (2014) 1
SCC 686, this Court held:
“11. The insured cannot claim anything more than what is covered by the insurance
policy. “The terms of the contract have to be construed strictly, without altering the
nature of the contract as the same may affect the interests of the parties adversely.”
The clauses of an insurance policy have to be read as they are. Consequently, the
terms of the insurance policy, that fix the responsibility of the insurance company
must also be read strictly. The contract must be read as a whole and every attempt
should be made to harmonise the terms thereof, keeping in mind that the rule of
contra proferentem does not apply in case of commercial contract, for the reason that
a clause in a commercial contract is bilateral and has mutually been agreed upon.
(Vide Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Sony Cheriyan [(1999) 6 SCC 451] , Polymat
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
25

India (P) Ltd. v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. [(2005) 9 SCC 174 : AIR 2005 SC 286] ,
Sumitomo Heavy Industries Ltd. v. ONGC Ltd. [(2010) 11 SCC 296 :
(2010) 4 SCC (Civ) 459 : AIR 2010 SC 3400] and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. v.
Dewan Chand Ram Saran [(2012) 5 SCC 306 : AIR 2012 SC 2829] .)” Likewise, in
BHS Industries v. Export Credit Guarantee Corpn. Ltd.
(2015) 9 SCC 414, this Court held:
“31. As has been held in Chandumull Jain [AIR 1966 SC 1644 : (1966) 3 SCR 500] by
the Constitution Bench that in a contract of insurance, there is a requirement of good
faith on the part of the insured and in case of ambiguity, it has to be construed
against the company. As per other authorities, the insurance policy has to be strictly
construed and it has to be read as a whole and nothing should be added or
subtracted. That apart, as has been held in Polymat India (P) Ltd. [(2005) 9 SCC 174]
, it is the duty of the Court to interpret the document as is understood between the
parties and regard being had to the reference to the stipulations contained in it.
xxx xxx xxx
35. The terms of the policy are to be strictly construed.
There can be no cavil about the proposition of law that in case of ambiguity, the construction has to
be made in favour of the insured”
32. In United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Orient Treasures (P) Ltd. (2016) 3 SCC 49, this Court
quoted Halsbury’s Laws of England as follows:
“37. In Halsbury's Laws of England (5th Edn., Vol. 60, Para 105) principle of contra
proferentem rule is stated thus:
“Contra proferentem rule.—Where there is ambiguity in the policy the court will
apply the contra proferentem rule. Where a policy is produced by the insurers, it is
their business to see that precision and clarity are attained and, if they fail to do so,
the ambiguity will be resolved by adopting the construction favourable to the insured.
Similarly, as regards language which emanates from the insured, such as the
language used in answer to questions in the proposal or in a slip, a construction
favourable to the insurers will prevail if the insured has created any ambiguity. This
rule, however, only becomes operative where the words are truly ambiguous; it is a
rule for resolving ambiguity and it cannot be invoked with a view to creating a doubt.
Therefore, where the words used are free from ambiguity in the sense that, fairly and
reasonably construed, they admit of only one meaning, the rule has no application.””
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
26

33. In Industrial Promotion & Investment Corpn. of Orissa Ltd. v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
(2016) 15 SCC 315, this Court referred to the contra proferentum rule as follows:
“10. We proceed to deal with the submission made by the counsel for the appellant
regarding the rule of contra proferentem. The Common Law rule of construction
“verba chartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem” means that ambiguity in
the wording of the policy is to be resolved against the party who prepared it.
MacGillivray on Insurance Law [ Legh-Jones, Longmore et al (Eds.), MacGillivray on
Insurance Law (9th Edn., Sweet and Maxwell, London 1997) at p. 280.] deals with
the rule of contra proferentem as follows:
“The contra proferentem rule of construction arises only where there is a wording
employed by those drafting the clause which leaves the court unable to decide by
ordinary principles of interpretation which of two meanings is the right one. ‘One
must not use the rule to create the ambiguity — one must find the ambiguity first.’
The words should receive their ordinary and natural meaning unless that is displaced
by a real ambiguity either appearing on the face of the policy or, possibly, by extrinsic
evidence of surrounding circumstances.” (footnotes omitted)
11.Colinvaux's Law of Insurance [ Robert and Merkin (Eds.), Colinvaux's Law of
Insurance (6th Edn., 1990) at p. 42.] propounds the contra proferentem rule as
under:
“Quite apart from contradictory clauses in policies, ambiguities are common in them
and it is often very uncertain what the parties to them mean. In such cases the rule is
that the policy, being drafted in language chosen by the insurers, must be taken most
strongly against them. It is construed contra proferentem, against those who offer it.
In a doubtful case the turn of the scale ought to be given against the speaker, because
he has not clearly and fully expressed himself. Nothing is easier than for the insurers
to express themselves in plain terms. The assured cannot put his own meaning upon
a policy, but, where it is ambiguous, it is to be construed in the sense in which he
might reasonably have understood it. If the insurers wish to escape liability under
given circumstances, they must use words admitting of no possible doubt.
But a clause is only to be contra proferentem in cases of real ambiguity. One must not
use the rule to create an ambiguity. One must find the ambiguity first. Even where a
clause by itself is ambiguous if, by looking at the whole policy, its meaning becomes
clear, there is no room for the application of the doctrine. So also where if one
meaning is given to a clause, the rest of the policy becomes clear, the policy should be
construed accordingly.” (footnotes omitted)”
34. The High Court held in the impugned judgment that as additional premium had been paid so as
to attract the applicability of IMT-5, in any case the Insurance Company would be liable under the
policy to pay compensation in the case of death to unnamed passengers other than the insured and
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
27

his paid driver or cleaner, Dr. Alpesh Gandhi being one such unnamed passenger. This was done on
the footing that the exception to IMT-5 was that a person in the employ of the insured coming
within the scope of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 is excluded from the cover, but that as
Dr. Alpesh Gandhi did not come within the scope of the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
compensation payable due to his death in a motor accident would be covered by IMT-5. We see no
reason to disturb this finding. The inapplicability of endorsement IMT-16, as additional premium
had not been paid would, therefore, make no difference on the facts of this case. Section-II, entitled
“liability to third parties” in the insurance policy dated 17.04.1997 set out hereinabove exempts the
insurance company from the death of a person carried in a motor car where such death arises out of
and in the course of the employment of such person by the insurer. The question that arises before
us is as to whether the expression “employment” is to be construed widely or narrowly – if widely
construed, a person may be said to “employed” by an employer even if he is not a regular employee
of the employer. However, the wider meaning that has been canvassed for by the insurance
company cannot possibly be given, given the language immediately before, namely, “in the course
of”, thereby indicating that the “employment” can only be that of a person regularly employed by the
employer. Even otherwise, assuming that there is an ambiguity or doubt, the contra proferentum
rule referred to hereinabove, must be applied, thus making it clear that such “employment” refers
only to regular employees of the Institute, which, as we have seen hereinabove, Dr. Alpesh Gandhi
was certainly not.
35. The Appellants placed reliance on an Order of this Court dated 05.03.2019, which reads as
follows:
“1. Leave granted.
2. The limited question to be examined arising from the impugned order is the effect
of the direction that the insurance company is liable to pay only a sum of Rs.25,000/-
and the balance amount may be recovered from the respondent No.2.
3. The appellant(s)/claimant(s) seeks to contend that it is impossible for the
appellants to enforce their remedy specially giving their economic status.
4. On the conspectus of the matter and on hearing learned counsel for the parties, we
consider it appropriate to direct that full amount should be paid by respondent
No.1-Insurance Company and the amount beyond the liability to be paid by
respondent No.1 may be recovered by the Insurance company from respondent No.2.
5. The appeal accordingly stands disposed of.
Parties to bear their own costs.” This Order seems to have been passed under Article 142 of the
Constitution on the facts of that case, without reference to any case law. In the view that we have
taken, it is unnecessary for us to place reliance on such Order.
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
28

36. In this view of the matter, we allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Gujarat High Court
and restore that of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
.……………………………J. (R.F. Nariman) .……………………………J. (S. Ravindra Bhat) New Delhi;
April 15, 2020.
Sushilaben Indravadan Gandhi vs The New India Assurance Company Limited on 15 April, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127871825/
29
