The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 264, (2020) 4 SCALE 302
Author: Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench: Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, Ashok Bhushan
                                                        NON-REPORTABLE
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.335 OF 2020
           THE STATE OF PUNJAB                             ...APPELLANT
                                           VERSUS
           JASBIR SINGH                                    …RESPONDENT
                                      JUDGMENT
MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1. The judgment dated 22.01.2019 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
in CRM-M No. 24691/2009 (O&M), which quashed FIR No. 74 dated 13.4.2008 registered against
the Respondent herein for the offences punishable under Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC”), has been called into question in this appeal.
2. The First Information Report (“FIR”) against the Respondent was registered under Sections 420,
467, 468 and 471 of the IPC on the allegation that he had forged and fabricated documents
submitted in the course of legal proceedings before the Revenue Courts. The relevant facts for the
purpose of the present appeal are as follows:
2.1 The Respondent’s mother, Karamjit Kaur, had filed an application in Tehsil Patti,
District Tarn Taran seeking transfer of the subject property in her name on the basis
of possession.
Vide order dated 28.06.2002, the Tehsildar (Sales) allowed this application, directing conveyance in
favour of Karamjit Kaur. Meanwhile, in the year 2005, the Respondent filed a suit for declaration
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
1

that the subject property was owned by him, which is still pending.
2.2 Later, in the year 2006, the Respondent filed an appeal against the order of the Tehsildar
(Sales), claiming that such order was based on an incorrect finding that the application was filed
only by his mother, while it had actually been made jointly.
2.3 Furthermore, in parallel mutation proceedings, the Respondent got the subject land mutated in
his favour along with his two cousins. In appeal, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate- cum-Collector, Patti
declared the mutation as contested, and vide order dated 11.12.2006, mutation was sanctioned in
favour of Tarjit Kaur, the elder sister-in-law of the Respondent. The appeal filed by the Respondent
against such order was dismissed vide order dated 06.06.2007.
2.4 On 29.08.2007, the SDM-cum-Sales Commissioner, Patti set aside the order of the Tehsildar
(Sales) dated 28.06.2002, directing that the transfer of land be entered jointly in the names of the
Respondent and his mother. This was done on the basis of a report submitted by the Tehsildar, Patti
stating that the initial application for transfer of land had been made jointly by these two persons. In
appeal, the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Sales Commissioner, Tarn Taran restored the initial
order dated 28.06.2002 passed by the Tehsildar (Sales), noting that the Respondent had submitted
forged and fabricated documents in connivance with the Tehsil staff in the appeal before the
SDM-cum-Sales Commissioner. Thus, the order dated 29.08.2007 was set aside and a direction was
issued to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Patti to immediately get an FIR registered against the
Respondent. 2.5 In pursuance of the said order, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Patti addressed a
communication dated 11.04.2008 to the SHO, Police Station, Patti on the basis of which the FIR in
question was registered against the Respondent. The trial commenced after the filing of the
chargesheet. During the trial, a petition was filed by the Respondent under Section 482 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“CrPC”) seeking quashing of the proceedings, which has been allowed
vide the impugned order.
3. The High Court, while passing the impugned order, principally accepted the ground raised by the
Respondent that the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Sales Commissioner hearing the appeal had
neither held an inquiry, nor had he directed the subordinate authority to hold any such inquiry
against the accused, in terms of Section 340 read with Section 195 of the CrPC. Thus, it was held that
the FIR was hit by these provisions, since it had been filed without any inquiry and without giving
any opportunity to the Respondent to be heard, and was therefore liable to be quashed.
4. Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
5. Ms. Uttara Babbar, learned counsel appearing for the State has taken us through the material on
record, and referred us to the provisions of Section 195 and Section 340 of the CrPC to contend that
it is not mandatory on the part of the Court to make a preliminary inquiry under Section 340 before
filing a complaint under Section 195; the Court is not required to afford an opportunity of hearing to
the person against whom a complaint is filed before the Magistrate for initiating prosecution
proceedings; and that Section 340 does not indicate that such person has any right to participate in
the preliminary inquiry. In support of these contentions, she relied upon the judgments in Pritish v.
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
2

State of Maharashtra, (2002) 1 SCC 253, decided by a three-Judge Bench of this Court, and of a
two-Judge Bench in Amarsang Nathaji v. Hardik Harshadbhai Patel, (2017) 1 SCC 113. Also drawing
our attention to the another judgment decided by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Sharad
Pawar v. Jagmohan Dalmiya, (2010) 15 SCC 290, she submitted that no dictum can be said to be
have been laid down in the said judgment as it was passed sub silentio, having assigned no reasons
to come to the conclusion that a preliminary inquiry is mandatory under Section 340, contrary to
the dictum of Pritish (supra).
6. Per contra, learned counsel for the Respondent argued in support of the judgment of the High
Court.
7. In view of the arguments advanced and the material on record, the only question to be considered
in this matter is as under:
Whether the Court should have heard the Respondent and given him an opportunity
to have a say in the matter before ordering prosecution under Section 195 of the
CrPC?
8. In this regard, it is pertinent to note Section 195(1)(b)
(ii) of the CrPC, which provides that no Court shall take cognizance of any offence mentioned
therein, if committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in any
Court:
“195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences
against public justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence.
(1) No Court shall take cognizance-
…
(b) …(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under section 471,
section 475 or section 476, of the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in
any Court…”
9. We may also note that Section 195(3) of the CrPC clarifies that the term “Court” means a Civil,
Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or
State Act, if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of the said section.
10. In the instant case, it is not in dispute that the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Sales
Commissioner, as well as the Sales Commissioner, Patti were discharging their duties as Revenue
Courts. It is further not in dispute that the criminal proceedings instituted against the Respondent
fell within the scope of Section 195(1)(b)(ii), as they pertained to offences under Sections 420, 467,
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
3

468 and 471 of the IPC. Essentially then, the controversy pertains to compliance with Section 340 of
the CrPC, which lays down the procedure to be followed while making a complaint with respect to an
offence as mentioned in Section 195. In this regard, it may be useful to note the wording of Section
340(1):
“(1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court is of
opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made
into any offence referred to in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 195, that Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a
document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court, such Court
may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary—
(a) record a finding to that effect;
(b) make a complaint thereof in writing;
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction;
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate,
or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do,
send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate.”
(emphasis supplied)
11. A bare reading of Section 340 reveals that if the Court is of the opinion that an inquiry should be
made into any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 195, which appears to
have been committed in, or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in
respect of a document produced or given in evidence in proceeding in that Court, such Court may,
after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary, record a finding to that effect and
thereafter make a complaint thereof in writing. Upon a plain reading of this provision, it is clear that
it is open for the Court to conduct (or not to conduct) a preliminary inquiry into the matter before
lodging a complaint in respect of an offence mentioned in Section 195(1)(b).
Indeed, a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Pritish (supra) dealing with the question in
consideration here, held that an opportunity to the would-be accused before the filing of the
complaint was not mandatory, and observed that the preliminary inquiry was itself not mandatory.
The Court observed thus:
“9. Reading of the sub-section makes it clear that the hub of this provision is
formation of an opinion by the court (before which proceedings were to be held) that
it is expedient in the interest of justice that an inquiry should be made into an offence
which appears to have been committed. In order to form such opinion the court is
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
4

empowered to hold a preliminary inquiry. It is not peremptory that such preliminary
inquiry should be held. Even without such preliminary inquiry the court can form
such an opinion when it appears to the court that an offence has been committed in
relation to a proceeding in that court. It is important to notice that even when the
court forms such an opinion it is not mandatory that the court should make a
complaint. This sub- section has conferred a power on the court to do so. It does not
mean that the court should, as a matter of course, make a complaint. But once the
court decides to do so, then the court should make a finding to the effect that on the
fact situation it is expedient in the interest of justice that the offence should further
be probed into. If the court finds it necessary to conduct a preliminary inquiry to
reach such a finding it is always open to the court to do so, though absence of any
such preliminary inquiry would not vitiate a finding reached by the court regarding
its opinion. It should again be remembered that the preliminary inquiry
contemplated in the sub- section is not for finding whether any particular person is
guilty or not. Far from that, the purpose of preliminary inquiry, even if the court opts
to conduct it, is only to decide whether it is expedient in the interest of justice to
inquire into the offence which appears to have been committed.
10. “Inquiry” is defined in Section 2( g) of the Code as “every inquiry, other than a
trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or court”. It refers to the pre-trial
inquiry, and in the present context it means the inquiry to be conducted by the
Magistrate. Once the court which forms an opinion, whether it is after conducting the
preliminary inquiry or not, that it is expedient in the interest of justice that an inquiry
should be made into any offence the said court has to make a complaint in writing to
the Magistrate of the First Class concerned. As the offences involved are all falling
within the purview of “warrant case” [as defined in Section 2(x)] of the Code the
Magistrate concerned has to follow the procedure prescribed in Chapter XIX of the
Code. In this context we may point out that Section 343 of the Code specifies that the
Magistrate to whom the complaint is made under Section 340 shall proceed to deal
with the case as if it were instituted on a police report.
That being the position, the Magistrate on receiving the complaint shall proceed under Section 238
to Section 243 of the Code.
11. Section 238 of the Code says that the Magistrate shall at the outset satisfy himself that copies of
all the relevant documents have been supplied to the accused. Section 239 enjoins on the Magistrate
to consider the complaint and the documents sent with it. He may also make such examination of
the accused, as he thinks necessary. Then the Magistrate has to hear both the prosecution and the
accused to consider whether the allegations against the accused are groundless. If he finds the
allegations to be groundless he has to discharge the accused at that stage by recording his reasons
thereof. Section 240 of the Code says that if the Magistrate is of opinion, in the aforesaid inquiry,
that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed the offence he has to frame a
charge in writing against the accused. Such charge shall then be read and explained to the accused
and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or not. If he pleads not guilty
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
5

then the Magistrate has to proceed to conduct the trial. Until then the inquiry continues before the
Magistrate.
12. Thus, the person against whom the complaint is made has a legal right to be heard whether he
should be tried for the offence or not, but such a legal right is envisaged only when the Magistrate
calls the accused to appear before him. The person concerned has then the right to participate in the
pre-trial inquiry envisaged in Section 239 of the Code. It is open to him to satisfy the Magistrate that
the allegations against him are groundless and that he is entitled to be discharged.
13. The scheme delineated above would clearly show that there is no statutory requirement to afford
an opportunity of hearing to the persons against whom that court might file a complaint before the
Magistrate for initiating prosecution proceedings. Learned counsel for the appellant contended that
even if there is no specific statutory provision for affording such an opportunity during the
preliminary inquiry stage, the fact that an appeal is provided in Section 341 of the Code, to any
person aggrieved by the order, is indicative of his right to participate in such preliminary inquiry.
14. Section 341 of the Code confers a power on the party on whose application the court has decided
or not decided to make a complaint, as well as the party against whom it is decided to make such
complaint, to file an appeal to the court to which the former court is subordinate. But the mere fact
that such an appeal is provided, it is not a premise for concluding that the court is under a legal
obligation to afford an opportunity (to the persons against whom the complaint would be made) to
be heard prior to making the complaint. There are other provisions in the Code for reaching
conclusions whether a person should be arrayed as accused in criminal proceedings or not, but in
most of those proceedings there is no legal obligation cast on the court or the authorities concerned,
to afford an opportunity of hearing to the would-be accused. In any event the appellant has already
availed of the opportunity of the provisions of Section 341 of the Code by filing the appeal before the
High Court as stated earlier.
xxx
18. We are unable to agree with the said view of the learned Single Judge as the same was taken
under the impression that a decision to order inquiry into the offence itself would prima facie
amount to holding him, if not guilty, very near to a finding of his guilt. We have pointed out earlier
that the purpose of conducting preliminary inquiry is not for that purpose at all. The would-be
accused is not necessary for the court to decide the question of expediency in the interest of justice
that an inquiry should be held. We have come across decisions of some other High Courts which
held the view that the persons against whom proceedings were instituted have no such right to
participate in the preliminary inquiry (vide M. Muthuswamy v. Special Police Establishment [1985
Cri LJ 420 (Mad)] ).” (emphasis supplied)
12. However, in the subsequent decision in Sharad Pawar (supra), while dealing with a similar
question, a three- Judge Bench of this Court did not take note of the dictum in Pritish (supra) and
went on to observe as follows:
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
6

“7. Having heard the learned Senior Counsel for both sides and after perusal of the
record, we are of the considered view that before giving a direction to filed complaint
against Defendants 1 to 6, it was necessary for the learned Single Judge to conduct a
preliminary enquiry as contemplated under Section 340 CrPC and also to afford an
opportunity of being heard to the defendants, which was admittedly not done.
8. We, therefore, in the interest of justice, allow these appeals, set aside the impugned
order of the High Court passed in the application filed by Respondent 1-plaintiff
under Section 340 CrPC and remit the matter to the learned Single Judge to decide
the application under Section 340 CrPC afresh in accordance with law, and after
affording reasonable opportunity of being heard to the defendants, against whom the
learned Single Judge ordered enquiry.”
13. Later, the judgment in Pritish (supra) came to be relied upon by a two-Judge Bench of this Court
in Amarsang Nathaji (supra). While dealing with the propriety of the procedure adopted by the
Court making a complaint under Section 340 of the Code, the Bench in Amarsang Nathaji observed
as follows:
“7. In the process of formation of opinion by the court that it is expedient in the
interests of justice that an inquiry should be made into, the requirement should only
be to have a prima facie satisfaction of the offence which appears to have been
committed. It is open to the court to hold a preliminary inquiry though it is not
mandatory. In case, the court is otherwise in a position to form such an opinion, that
it appears to the court that an offence as referred to under Section 340 CrPC has been
committed, the court may dispense with the preliminary inquiry. Even after forming
an opinion as to the offence which appears to have been committed also, it is not
mandatory that a complaint should be filed as a matter of course. (See Pritish v. State
of Maharashtra [Pritish v. State of Maharashtra, (2002) 1 SCC 253: 2002 SCC (Cri)
140].) In the same decision, the Court also took note of the following observations
made by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Iqbal Singh Marwah v. Meenakshi
Marwah, (2005) 4 SCC 370 in relation to the scope of Section 340 of the CrPC:
“23. In view of the language used in Section 340 CrPC the court is not bound to make
a complaint regarding commission of an offence referred to in Section 195(1)(b), as
the section is conditioned by the words “court is of opinion that it is expedient in the
interests of justice”. This shows that such a course will be adopted only if the interest
of justice requires and not in every case. Before filing of the complaint, the court may
hold a preliminary enquiry and record a finding to the effect that it is expedient in the
interests of justice that enquiry should be made into any of the offences referred to in
Section 195(1)(b). This expediency will normally be judged by the court by weighing
not the magnitude of injury suffered by the person affected by such forgery or forged
document, but having regard to the effect or impact, such commission of offence has
upon administration of justice. It is possible that such forged document or forgery
may cause a very serious or substantial injury to a person in the sense that it may
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
7

deprive him of a very valuable property or status or the like, but such document may
be just a piece of evidence produced or given in evidence in court, where voluminous
evidence may have been adduced and the effect of such piece of evidence on the
broad concept of administration of justice may be minimal. In such circumstances,
the court may not consider it expedient in the interest of justice to make a
complaint.” (emphasis supplied) Notably, however, the decision in Amarsang Nathaji
did not take note of the contrary observations made in Sharad Pawar (supra).
14. In any event, given that the decision of the three- Judge Bench in Sharad Pawar (supra) did not
assign any reason as to why it was departing from the opinion expressed by a Coordinate Bench in
Pritish (supra) regarding the necessity of a preliminary inquiry under Section 340 of the CrPC, as
also the observations made by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Iqbal Singh Marwah (supra), we
find it necessary that the present matter be placed before a larger Bench for its consideration,
particularly to answer the following questions:
(i) Whether Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 mandates a
preliminary inquiry and an opportunity of hearing to the would-be accused before a
complaint is made under Section 195 of the Code by a Court?
(ii) What is the scope and ambit of such preliminary inquiry?
15. Accordingly, we direct the Registry to place the papers before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for
appropriate orders.
……………………………………………J. (ASHOK BHUSHAN) ……………………………………………J. (MOHAN
M. SHANTANAGOUDAR) NEW DELHI FEBRUARY 26, 2020
The State Of Punjab vs Jasbir Singh on 26 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83319153/
8
