The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18
December, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 SUPREME COURT 122, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
896
Author: Ashok Bhushan
Bench: M.R. Shah, R. Subhash Reddy, Ashok Bhushan
                                                                 REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4096 of 2020
                            (arising out of SLP(C)No.15044 of 2020)
          THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                 ...APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
          KESHAO VISHWANATH SONONE & ANR.                ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                             WITH
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.4098-4100 of 2020
                         (arising out of SLP(C)No.15045-15047 of 2020)
          THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.                 ...APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
          ADIM GOWARI SAMAJ VIKAS MANDAL & ORS....RESPONDENT(S)
                                             WITH
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4097 of 2020
                            (arising out of SLP(C)No.7901 of 2019)
          ZANAKLAL                                       ...APPELLANT(S)
Signature Not Verified                      VERSUS
Digitally signed by
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
1

Nidhi Ahuja
Date: 2020.12.18
11:13:52 IST
Reason:
          ADIVASI GOND GOVARI (GOWARI)
          SEWA MANDAL & ORS.                             ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                                                           1
                                 AND
             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4101 of 2020
     (arising out of SLP(C) Diary No.17886 of 2020)
UNION OF INDIA                                   ...APPELLANT(S)
                               VERSUS
ADIVASI GOND GOVARI (GOWARI)
SEVA MANDAL & ORS.                               ...RESPONDENT(S)
                        J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
Leave granted.
2. These appeals filed against the common judgment dated 14.08.2018 of Bombay High Court,
Nagpur Bench raise the issues of seminal importance pertaining to a Scheduled Tribe namely “Gond
Govari” in the State of Maharashtra included in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 as
amended by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 as applicable in
the State of Maharashtra.
3. The Bombay High Court vide judgment dated 14.08.2018 allowed four writ petitions being Writ
Petition No. 1742 of 2007, Writ Petition No.4779 of 2008, Writ Petition No. 4032 of 2009 and Writ
Petition No.1680 of 2012. We may notice in brief the claim of the writ petitioners in the aforesaid
writ petitions.
Writ Petition No.1742 of 2007 - Keshao Vishwanath Sunone Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.
4. Keshao Vishwanath Sunone (hereinafter referred to as “Sunone”) claimed himself to belong to
Gowari caste. The petitioner’s claim in the writ petition is that Sunone belong to Gowari caste, which
comes under the Scheduled Tribes as there is no Gond Govari caste in existence. Sunone was
appointed as Technical Assistant on 29.08.1983. The caste certificate of Gond Govari Scheduled
Tribe was issued to Sunone on 03.07.1986. The caste certificate of Sunone was sent for verification
of caste. The Caste Scrutiny Committee vide its order dated 13.01.2007 invalidated the caste
certificate of Sunone. Challenging the order of Caste Scrutiny Committee dated 13.01.2007, writ
petition was filed with following prayers:-
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
2

“a) issue appropriate writ, order or directions thereby quash and set aside an order
passed by the Scheduled Tribe Certificate Scrutiny Committee, Amravati Division,
Amravati dated 13.1.2007;
       b)       stay and effect and operation of the
                impugned    order     dated   13.1.2007
                passed   by    the    Scheduled   Tribe
                Certificate     Scrutiny     Committee,
Amravati Division, Amravati during the pendency of this petition and to protect the
services of the petitioners;
c) grant any other relief as this Hon’ble Court deems fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.” Writ Petition No.4779 of 2008 - Adivasi Gond Govari
(Gowari) Sewa Mandal through its President Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.
5. The writ petitioner claimed to be an association working for the welfare of people belonging to
Gond Govari community. The petitioner association had filed a writ petition questing the caste
validity certificate issued to respondent Nos.4 to 19 as Scheduled Tribe (Gond Govari). Petitioners’
case was that without conducting an enquiry, the caste validity certificate was issued. The
petitioners’ case further was that the validity certificate issued as Gond Govari Scheduled Tribe was
wrongly issued since the respondents belonged to Gowari community and they did not belong to
Gond Govari community.
6. In the writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the caste validity certificates issued to
respondent Nos.4 to 19. A further direction was sought that Caste Scrutiny Committee, Nagpur not
to issue caste validity certificate pertaining to Gond Govari Scheduled Tribe and the detailed
inquiries be conducted. It was further prayed that Commissioner, Tribal Research and Training
Institute, Pune and Caste Scrutiny Committee Nagpur be directed to conduct full place enquiry in
the relation to Gowari and Gond Govari entries.
Writ Petition No.4032 of 2009 - Adim Gowari Samaj Vikas Mandal and Ors. Vs. State of
Maharashtra and Anr.
7. The petitioner association registered in 2004 claimed to be working in the field of betterment and
welfare of members of people belonging to Gowari community. In the writ petition, reference was
made to the Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985, whereby the Government issued guidelines
for taking precautionary measures while issuing the tribe certificate. Alongwith the Government
Resolution, a chart was issued containing a comparative study, which relate to members of actual
Scheduled Tribes and other castes having similar nomenclature. The writ petition contains a
detailed reference to a subsequent Government Resolution dated 15.06.1995 where under the
Government Resolution of the State of Maharashtra, Gowari was treated to be other backward
community, special backward class with 2% reservation. In the writ petition, validity of the
Government Resolution dated 24.06.1985 prescribing the guidelines by way of affinity test to claim
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
3

the Gowari community was challenged.
Writ Petition No.1680 of 2012 - Adiwasi Gond Govari (Gowari) Seva Mandal Vs. Union of India &
Ors.
8. By notification dated 16.06.2011 issued by the Government of India, Gowari community was
included in the other backward class category from common Central List in respect of State of
Maharashtra. The writ petitioner claimed that Gowari community and its members have been
included in Entry No.18 of the Scheduled Tribes order in relation to State of Maharashtra. The
direction was sought to instruct the Sub-Divisional Magistrate to issue the caste certificates to the
persons belonging to Gowari community as Scheduled Tribes. The writ petitioner has also
challenged the Government Resolutions dated 24.04.1985, 13.06.1995 and 15.06.1995. In the writ
petition, following prayers were made:-
“(a) issue appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus thereby
quash and set aside impugned Gazette Notification dated 16.06.2011 (Annexure
No.9) issued by Government of India as unconstitutional as regards Gowari
community and further delete the entry of Gowari community from the common
central list of OBC category in respect of State of Maharashtra;
(b) by issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction remove the anamoly from the Entry 18 of Para
19 of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Order, 1976 as regards Gond Gowari community;
(c) by issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction declare that the Gowari community and its
members have been included in the Entry 18 of Para 19 of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Order, 1976;
(d) by issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature mandamus direct the State
Government and instruct Sub Divisional Offices, Magistrates throughout the State to issue caste
certificates to the people belonging to Gowari community being Scheduled Tribe category people
and further direct Cast Scrutiny Committee to issue validity certificates to Gowari Community
people being Scheduled Tribe;
(e) issue appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus, thereby quash and set
aside the Govt. Resolution, dt.24.4.1985, 13.6.1995, & 15.6.1995 being illegal, at Annexure Nos.10, 11
&.
12;
(f) grant any other relief which may be deemed fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case.”
9. The Division Bench vide its impugned judgment dated 14.08.2018 allowed the writ petitions by
following order:-
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
4

“ORDER (1) We hold and declare that the tribe Gond Gowari was completely extinct
before 1911 and no trace of it was found either in the Maratha Country of C.P. and
Berar or in the State of Madhya Pradesh prior to 1956.
(2) We hold and declare that there did not exist any tribe as Gond Gowari as on 29-
10-1956, i.e. the date of its inclusion as 28th Item in Entry No. 18 of the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 in relation to the State of Maharashtra and it was Gowari community alone
shown as Gond Gowari, therein.
(3) The tribe Gond Gowari shown as 28th Item in Entry No. 18 of the said Order is not a sub-tribe of
Gond and, therefore, the claim for its validity cannot be tested on the basis of the guidelines in
respect of affinity test specified in the Government Resolution dated 24-4-1985. (4) The people
belonging to Gowari community in the State of Maharashtra cannot be denied the benefits of the
Scheduled Tribes, merely because the Gowari community is shown in the list of Special Backward
Classes in relation to the State of Maharashtra in the Government Resolutions dated 13-6-1995 and
15-6-1995 and as Other Backward Class category in the Gazette Notification dated 16-6-2011 issued
by the Government of India in the common Central list in respect of the State of Maharashtra.
(5) The order dated 13-1-2007 passed by the Scheduled Tribes Certificate Scrutiny Committee at
Amravati, invalidating the claim of the petitioner-Keshao s/o Vishwanath Sonone in Writ Petition
No. 1742 of 2007, is hereby quashed and set aside. The said matter is remanded back to the Scrutiny
Committee to decide it afresh in the light of the decision of this Court.
(6) We direct the Registry of this Court to get the entire old record of Census Reports, Parliamentary
Debate, Gazetteers, etc., called for the purposes of these petitions from the Library, scanned, within
a period of six weeks, as it has worn out. The record is very important and it needs to be preserved,
as it is also not available on the 'Net'.”
10. Aggrieved by judgment of the Division Bench, the State of Maharashtra has filed Civil Appeals
arising out of SLP (C) No.15044 of 2020 and SLP (C) Nos. 15045-15047 of 2020. Union of India has
also filed Civil Appeal arising out of Diary No.17886 of 2020 as well as one Zanaklal Bhaisaku
Mangar, who was respondent No.15 in Writ Petition No.4779 of 2008 filed by Adivasi Gond Govari
(Gowari) Sewa Mandal has filed SLP (C) No.7901 of 2019 in this Court.
11. We have heard Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel, Shri Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure,
learned counsel for the appellant, State of Maharashtra. Shri Sanjay Jain, learned Additional
Solicitor General for the appellant, Union of India and Shri C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel for
the appellnt-Zanaklal Bhaisaku Mangar. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel has appeared
for the respondents. We have also heard Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, learned counsel for the respondents
and other learned counsel.
12. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel submits that the High Court committed error in
tinkering with the Entries under the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 which could only
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
5

be done by a Parliamentary Act as per constitutional provision of Article 342 sub-clause (2). A
detailed procedure is to be followed to amend Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 which
could not have been done by the High Court as has been done in the impugned judgment. It is
submitted that Constitution Bench in State of Maharashtra Vs. Milind and Ors., (2001) 1 SCC 4 has
held that Entries in Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 can only be amended by an Act of
Parliament under Article 342(2) and State Governments or Courts or other Authorities or Tribunals
cannot hold inquiry so as to see whether any caste should be considered as included in Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, where it is not specifically mentioned in the same.
13. Shri Divan submits that Scheduled Tribe, namely, 'Gond Gowari' which is included in Entry 18 of
Part- IX of Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 do exist and is clearly different from caste
'Gowari'. The High Court was in error in holding that Tribe 'Gond Gowari' is an extinct Tribe which
is not in existence after 1911. The Entry 'Gond Gowari' being maintained in Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 and was not deleted even after several Parliamentary Acts were passed to
amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The High Court clearly erred in holding
that Scheduled Tribe 'Gond Gowari' is not in existence when the caste was included in Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
14. Shri Divan submits that Anthropological Expert Report which was on record before the High
Court also clearly stated that 'Gond Gowari' is a Scheduled Tribe which is different with 'Gowari'.
The caste 'Gowari' has close affinity with 'Yadav' and 'Ahir' whereas 'Gond Gowari' has affinity with
'Gond'. Both are different in its culture and customs. Shri Divan has also placed reliance on the
report submitted by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai dated 29.12.2020 on
“Socio-Anthropological Study of Gowari Community of Maharashtra”. He submits that in the report
after considering all aspects including field visits by research team at different places had found two
communities, i.e., 'Gond Gowari' and 'Gowari' different in customs, worship and settlement. The
report submits that 'Gond Gowari' is sub-Tribe of 'Gond' whereas 'Gowari' are cattle graziers. It is
submitted that there have been several attempts by 'Gowari' to obtain status of Scheduled Tribes by
including them within the List of Scheduled Tribes through Parliamentary enactment and 'Gowaris'
having failed in all their attempts, have filed the writ petitions for seeking declaration which could
not have been granted by a Court of law. The High Court entered into the evidence to come to the
finding that the Tribe 'Gond Gowari' was completely extinct before 1911 which exercise could not
have been undertaken in writ petitions. There are other materials on records which clearly proved
the presence of 'Gond Gowari' before and after 1956 and even as on date and the High Court
committed error in holding that the Tribe 'Gond Gowari' was completely extinct before 1911.
15. It is submitted that 'Gowari' has already been declared as Special Backward Class by the State
Government by Resolutions dated 13.06.1995 and 15.06.1995 and also included in the category of
other Backward Classes by Government of India notification dated 16.06.2011. The benefit of
Resolution has already been availed by 'Gowari' and the fact that they have been recognised as
Special Backward Class and other Backward Class category by the State of Maharashtra and
Government of India respectively is indicative of fact that they are not Scheduled Tribes but are
belonging to other Backward Class.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
6

16. Shri Shyam Divan has also relied on the Division Bench judgment of the High Court of Bombay
at Nagpur dated 04.04.1996 delivered in Writ Petition No.1691 of 1990 - Adivasi Gowari Samaj
Sanghatan, Maharashtra and Anr. Vs. Union of India and Ors., where a writ petitioner claiming
Scheduled Caste status by 'Gowari' community was rejected by the Division Bench approving the
action of authority in examining the affinity of the writ petitioner with the main Tribe 'Gond'. Shri
Divan submits that there being a Division Bench judgment rejecting the claim of Gowari which was
a judgment of co-ordinate Bench, the High Court in the impugned judgment could not have taken a
contrary view.
17. Shri Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General in support of the appeal filed by the Union
of India contends that the High Court failed to appreciate that list of Scheduled Tribes in relation to
a State which is notified by the order of the President after consultation with the State can be
modified only through an Act by the Parliament in consultation with the State Government. The
High Court in the impugned judgment has substituted its own opinion in place of the opinion of the
Parliament which is not permissible in law.
18. Shri C.U. Singh, learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the High Court committed
an error in holding that 'Gond Gowari' are extinct. It is submitted that the High Court has ignored
the Parliamentary Committee's proceedings and studies on the subject. Shri C.U. Singh specifically
referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the “The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Orders (Amendment) Bill, 1976” submits that only those communities were excluded who
were not found in a State in the return of Census of 1961 and 1971. He submits that the fact that
'Gond Gowari' was retained and was not excluded by the Amendment Act, 1976 clearly points out
that the Parliament was satisfied with the existence of 'Gond Gowari'. Shri Singh also referring to
Article 338A of the Constitution which has been inserted by the Constitution (Eighty-Ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003 submits that National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes having been
constituted which is empowered to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the Scheduled Tribes, without reference to National Commission for the Scheduled
Tribes, it was not open for the writ petitioners to file a writ petition for claiming the status of
Scheduled Tribes. Shri C.U. Singh further, submits that in the writ petition filed before the High
Court there was no specific plea that Gond Gowari was extinct.
19. Shri Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure, learned counsel adopting the submissions of Shri Shyam Divan
submits that 'Gowari' had made several attempts to obtain the benefits of Scheduled Tribes and they
having failed in all their attempts have filed the writ petitions to obtain a declaration from the Court
of Law regarding their status as Scheduled Tribes which is not permissible in law.
20. Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents supporting the
judgment of the High Court contends that it was open for the High Court to find out the true
meaning and contents of Entry 'Gond Gowari' as included in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
Order, 1950. He submits that insofar as Government Resolutions declaring the 'Gowari' as Special
Backward Class and other Backward Class, the said Resolutions and notifications were challenged
by the writ petitioners in their writ petitions. They never wanted the benefit of Special Backward
Class or other Backward Class. The High Court has rightly restored the benefit of Scheduled Tribes
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
7

'Gowari' to which they were entitled in law. Shri Rohatgi submits that the High Court did not
commit error in entering into an issue and returning a finding that 'Gond Gowari' was extinct before
1911. When 'Gond Gowari' was extinct before 1911 it was the 'Gowari' who were entitled to be treated
as Scheduled Tribes in the Entry 18. It was fully permissible for the High Court to find out as to
whether any Tribe named 'Gond Gowari' is in existence or not and who are the true 'Gond Gowari'
entitled for the benefit of the Scheduled Tribes.
21. Shri Rohatgi submits that 'Gond Gowari' was a small hybrid caste by alliance of Gond and
Gowari, in 1911 Gond Gowari were completely amalgamated with the Tribe Gowari. It is submitted
that in fact there is no Tribe of “Gond Gowari” and it is in fact Gowari which was included in the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. He submits that for Gowari to recognise as Scheduled
Tribes there is no necessity of showing any affinity with Gond. He submits that by the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Amendment) Act, 1976, the word including “Gond Gowari” as
occurring in Entry 12 was substituted by Entry 18 by deleting word Gond which clearly means that
all Tribes mentioned in the Entry 18 are independent Tribes with having no affinity with Gond. He
submits that the State of Maharashtra right from 1967 has been taking the stand that Gowari be
included as separate category of Scheduled Tribe in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950, the State cannot suddenly take a U-turn and start denying the claim of Gowari to be Scheduled
Tribe. Shri Rohatgi submits that the High Court has referred to a host of materials considered in the
judgment for coming to the conclusion that Tribe Gond Gowari became extinct prior to 1911. The
exercise undertaken by the High Court is in consonance with the law laid down by the Constitution
Bench in B. Basavalingappa Vs. D. Munichinnappa and Ors., AIR 1965 SC 1269. He submits that
before the High Court it does not make any difference whether the claim that Gond Gowari were
extinct before 1911 was admitted or disputed, even it is disputed, the High Court had to find out
truth to clear the confusion after looking into the evidence on record. He submits that the High
Court has referred to the Census Reports and has rightly found out that after 1911 in subsequent
Censuses held that it was only Gowari who were found present. Gond Gowari being surplusage the
claim was raised for substitution of Gond Gowari with Gowari. It is submitted that it is the Gowari
who were found present in Census after 1911 and it were Gowari who were entitled to be treated as
Scheduled Tribes and Gowari being not a sub-caste of Gond they were not required to prove any
affinity with Gond and the Resolution dated 24.04.1985 of the State of Maharashtra requiring
affinity to be proved was not in accordance with law. Shri Rohatgi submits that it is actually Gowari
who have been given certificate of Scheduled Tribes. He submits that there are no competitive
claims of Gond Gowari, there being no Tribe of Gond Gowari in existence as of now.
22. Shri Rohatgi further submits that ratio of Constitution Bench in State of Maharashtra Vs. Milind
and Ors. is not in accord with the ratio of earlier Constitution Bench in B. Basavlingappa. There
being conflict between the ratio of two Constitution Benches, the matter needs to be referred to a
larger Constitution Bench for resolving the conflict. Shri Rohatgi lastly submits that after the
judgment of Division Bench dated 14.08.2018, Scheduled Tribes' certificates were issued on the
basis of which admissions/employment have been undertaken by members of Gowari community
which benefit needs to be protected by this Court.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
8

23. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, appearing for the respondents submits that Gond Gowari community was
short-lived and it got extinct completely prior to the Census of 1911. There did not exist any Tribe
named 'Gond Gowari' as on 29.10.1956, i.e., the date of its inclusion in Entry No.18 of the
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. It is submitted that Gowari community alone which
was shown as 'Gond Gowari'. Reliance has also been placed on book titled “Castes and Tribes of the
Central Provinces of India” by Russell and Hira Lal. It is submitted that first Backward Classes
Commission under the Chairmanship of Kakasaheb Kalelkar had recommended Gowari under the
Sub-group/Sub-tribes 'Gond' group, which was to be added with Gond, but by some mistake instead
of Gowari, Gond Gowari was included in the Entry in the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Lists (Amendment) Bill, 1956. Although amendment was supposed to be made as Gowari to be
added with Gond but was erroneously made as Gond Gowari. It is submitted that in the year 1965,
the Chief Minister of Maharashtra had discussed with the Advisory Committee and it was
recommended that the Gowari Tribe be added as a separate Tribe by deleting the Entry of Gond
Gowari. The State of Maharashtra having taken a stand that Gowari be included as separate Entry in
the Scheduled Tribes, there is a legitimate expectation in the Gowari community. After the judgment
of the High Court, the Revenue Minister of the State has made a statement that High Court
judgment shall be implemented which stand has subsequently been changed.
24. Learned counsel for the parties have placed reliance on the various judgments of this Court
which shall be referred to while considering the submissions in detail.
25. Before we enter into the respective submissions of learned counsel for the parties, it is relevant
to notice the relevant constitutional provisions as well as the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950 amended from time to time and other relevant statutory provisions.
26. Part XVI of the Constitution deals with “Special Provisions relating to certain classes”. Article
342 of the Constitution deals with Scheduled Tribes, which is to the following effect:-
“342. Scheduled Tribes--(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union
territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by
public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups
within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution
be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the
case may be (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal
community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any
subsequent notification.”
27. Article 366(25) defines Scheduled Tribes in following words:-
“366. Definitions.-- In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is
to say— XXXXXXXXXXXXX (25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or tribal
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
9

communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are
deemed under Article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this
Constitution;
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX”
28. In exercise of power under Article 342, the President had issued the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 dated 06.09.1950. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Order states:-
“2. The tribes or tribal communities, or parts of, or groups within, tribes or tribal
communities, specified in Parts I to XIV of the Schedule to this Order shall, in
relation to the States to which those Parts respectively relate, be deemed. to be
Scheduled Tribes so far as regards members thereof resident in the localities
specified in relation to them respectively in those Parts of that Schedule.
3. Any reference in the Schedule to this Order to a district or other territorial division
of a State shall be construed as a reference to that district or other territorial division
as existing on the 26th January, 1950.”
29. The Schedule contains details of Scheduled Tribes with reference to different States. Part III to
the Schedule deals with the State of Bombay and Entry No.9 of Part III mentioned “9. Gond”. Part
IV dealt with Madhya Pradesh where also Entry No.12 mentions “Gond [including Madia (Maria)
and Mudia (Muria)]”. The Parliament passed an Act namely, The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1956 to provide for the inclusion in, and the exclusion from the
lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, of certain castes and tribes and matters connected
therewith. AS per Section 4 of the Act, 1956, Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 was
amended in the manner and to the extent as specified in Schedule III. In Schedule III, Entry No.9
was substituted by following Entry:-
“9. Gond or Rajgond.”
30. Part IV which deals with Madhya Pradesh, Entry 12 was substituted by following entry:-
“12 Gond, including-
Arakh or Arrakh Agaria Asur Badi Maria or Bada Maria Bhatola Bhimma Bhuta,
Koilabhuta or Koilabhuti Bhar Bisonhorn Maria Chota Maria Dandami Maria Dhuru
or Dhurwa Dhoba Dhulia Dorla Gaiki Gatta or Gatti Gaita Gond Gowari Hill Maria
Kandra Kalanga Khatola Koitar Koya Khirwar or Khirwara Kucha Maria Kuchaki
Maria Madia (Maria) Mana Mannewer Moghya or Mogia or Manghya Mudia (Muria)
Nagarchi Nagwanshi Ojha Raj Sonjhari Jhareka Thatia or Thotya Wade Maria or
Vade Maria”
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
10

31. It is to be noticed that amendment to the Scheduled Tribes with respect to Madhya Pradesh was
consequent to recommendations by the report of the Backward Classes Commission also known as
Kalelkar Commission. With regard to Madhya Pradesh with regard to list of Scheduled Tribes
published in Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 together with the revision suggested by
the Backward Classes Commission is included in volume II of the Report. Entry No.12 in the List of
the Scheduled Tribes was with respect to Gond [including Madia (Maria) and Mudia (Muria)].
Backward Classes Commission suggested addition of several sub-tribes of Gond with Gond. Column
No.VI of the Table contains heading “Commission’s recommendation for inclusion”. Item No.10 in
Column No.6 is to the following effect:-
“10. Sub-Tribes of Gond : (to be added with Gond) Arakh or Arrakh Agaria Asur
Bhatola Bhimma Bhuta or Keliabhuta or Koilabhuti Bhar Dhuru or Dhurwa Dhoba
Dhulia Gatta or Gatti Gaita Gaiki Ganda or Gandi Gowari Kalanga Khatola Koitar
Koya Khirwar or Khirwara Moghya or Mogia or Monghya Nagarchi Ojha Thatia or
Thotya Raj Nagwanshi Mannewar Dorla Mana Kandra Bison horn Miria Hill Maria
Badi Maria or Bada Maria, Chota Maria, Dandami Maria Kuchaki Maria Kucha Maria
Wade Maria or Vade Maria”
32. The States Reorganisation Act, 1956 was enacted by Parliament to provide for the reorganisation
of the States of India and for matters connected therewith. Section 8 provided for formation of a
new Bombay State. By virtue of Section 8(1)(c) following districts, which then existed in the State of
Madhya Pradesh were included in the new Bombay State, which is to the following effect:-
“8. Formation of a new Bombay State.―(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be
formed a new State to be known as the State of Bombay comprising the following
territories, namely:― XXXXXXXXXXXX
(c) Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda
districts in the existing State of Madhya Pradesh;
XXXXXXXXXXXX”
33. The above districts were earlier part of the State of Madhya Pradesh. Section 41 of the States
Reorganisation Act provide for modification of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders
with regard to territorial changes and formation of new States under the provisions of Part II. In
exercise of power under Section 41 of the States Reorganisation Act, Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Lists modification under Order 1950 was issued dated 29.10.1956. Part IV of the
Schedule dealt with Bombay. Schedule III contains the modification to the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950. Part IV of the Schedule dealt with Bombay. Although, Entry No. 9 continued as
Gond or Rajgond but with regard to certain Tehsils of Districts Amrawati, Chanda and Yeotmal,
Entry No.12 alongwith Entry of Gond following was included:-
“7. In (1) Melghat tahsil of the Amravati District, (2) Gadchiroli and Sironcha tahsils
of the Chanda District, (3) Kelapur, Wani and Yeotmal tahsils of the Yeotmal
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
11

District:-
XXXXXXXXXXXX
12. Gond, including:-
Arakh or Arrakh Agaria Asur Badi Maria or Bada Maria Bhatola Bhimma Bhuta,
Koilabhuta or Koilabhuti Bhar Bisonhorn Maria Chota Maria Dandami Maria Dhuru
or Dhurwa Dhoba Dhu1ia Dorla Gaiki Gatta or Gatti Gaita Gond Gowari Hill Maria
Kandra Kalanga Khatola Koitar Koya”
34. We, thus, notice that after recommendation of Backward Classes Commission for the State of
Madhya Pradesh by virtue of Act, 1956, with the tribe “Gond” “Gond Govari” was added as the
Scheduled Tribes by modification order dated 29.10.1956. With respect to State of Bombay in
specific areas, with regard to entry of Gond as Scheduled Tribe, several sub-tribes including “Gond
Govari” was added as noticed above.
35. The Parliament enacted the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act,
1976 (Act No.108 of 1976) to provide for the inclusion in, and the exclusion from the list of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, of certain castes and tribes, for the re-adjustment of
representation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies in so far as such re- adjustment is
necessitated by such inclusion or exclusion and for matters connected therewith. The Statements of
Objects and Reasons of the Bill is relevant, which is to the following effect:-
"STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS Under the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders some communities have been specified as Scheduled Castes
or as Scheduled Tribes only in certain areas of the State concerned and not in respect
of the whole State. This has been causing difficulties to members of these
communities in the areas where they have not been so specified. The present Bill
generally seeks to remove these area restrictions. However, in cases where
continuance of such restrictions were specifically recommended by the Joint
Committee on the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Bill,
1967, no change is being effected. The Committee had also recommended exclusion
of certain communities from the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
These exclusions are not being made at present and such communities are being
retained in the lists with the present area restrictions. Such of the communities in
respect of which the Joint Committee had recommended exclusion on the ground
that they were not found in a State are, however, being excluded if there were no
returns in respect of these communities in the censuses of 1961 and 1971.
2. The proposed amendments in the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
may lead to an increase in the population of these Castes and Tribes and
consequently in the number of reserved seats in the Lok Sabha and certain State
Legislative Assemblies. Provisions have therefore been made in the Bill to empower
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
12

the census authority to re-estimate the population of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes and the Election Commission to reallocate the reserved
constituencies."
36. The second Schedule of the Act, 1976 provides for substitution in Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 as indicated therein. With regard to State of Maharashtra, which was formed,
Part IX of the Second Schedule, Entry No.18 deals with Scheduled Tribe “Gond”, which is to the
following effect:-
“18. Gond Rajgond, Arakh, Arrakh, Agaria, Asur, Badi Maria, Bada Maria, Bhatola,
Bhimma, Bhuta, Koilabhuta, Koilabhuti, Bhar, Bisonhorn Maria. Chota Maria,
Dandami Maria, Dhuru, Dhurwa, Dhoba, Dhulia, Dorla, Gaiki, Gatta, Gatti, Gaita,
Gond Gowari, Hill Maria, Kandra, Kalanga, Khatala, Koitar, Koya, Khirwar,
Khirwara, Kucha Maria, Kuchaki Maria, Madia, Maria, Mana, Mannewar, Moghya,
Mogia, Monghya, Mudia, Muria, Nagarchi, Naikpod, Nagwanshi, Ojha, Raj, Sonjhari
Jhareka, Thatia, Thotya, Wade Maria, Vade Maria”
37. Subsequent to above, the Parliament passed the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders
(Amendment) Act, 2002, the preamble of which is to the following effect:-
“An Act to provide for the inclusion in the lists of Scheduled Tribes, of certain tribes
or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities,
equivalent names or synonyms of such tribes or communities, removal of area
restrictions and bifurcation and clubbing of entries; imposition of area restriction in
respect of certain castes in the lists of Scheduled Castes, and the exclusion of certain
castes and tribes from the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, in relation
to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat,
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Mizoram, Orissa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal.”
38. The only amendment which was made with respect to Schedule pertaining to Maharashtra in
Entry 18 was to the following effect:-
    “(i)    in Part IX – Maharashtra—
           (i) omit entry 12;
           (ii)   in   entry    18   for    “Gond    Rajgond”
           substitute “Gond, Rajgond”;
          (iii) omit entry 45;”
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
13

39. The above amendment in the Scheduled Castes order indicate the care which was taken by the
legislature in describing the Scheduled Tribes entries. By the above amendment in earlier Entry
No.18 of “Gond Rajgond”, substitution was made by which now it is read as “Gond, Rajgond”.
40. From the submissions of learned Counsel for the parties and materials on record, following
questions arise for consideration: -
1) Whether the High Court in the writ petition giving rise to these appeals could have
entertained the claim of the caste “Gowari”, which is not included as Scheduled Tribe
in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, that it be declared a Scheduled
Tribe as “Gond Govari” which is included at Item No.18 of Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 applicable in the State of Maharashtra and further to take
evidence to adjudicate such claim?
2) Whether the ratio of the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in B.
Basavalingappa Vs. D. Munichinnappa, AIR 1965 SC 1269 permits the High Court to
take evidence to find out whether ‘Gowari’ are ‘Gond Gowari’ and is there any conflict
in ratio of judgment of Constitution Bench in B. Basavalingappa and subsequent
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State of Maharashtra Vs. Milind, (2001)
1 SCC 4?
3) Whether the High Court could have entered into the adjudication of the issue that
‘Gond Gowari’ which is a Scheduled Tribe mentioned in Scheduled Tribes Order,
1950, as amended up to date is no more in existence and was extinct before 1911?
4) Whether the conclusion of the High Court in the impugned judgment that ‘Gond
Gowari’ Tribe was extinct before 1911 is supported on the materials which were on
record before the High Court?
5) Whether caste ‘Gowari’ is same as ‘Gond Gowari’ included at Item No.28, Entry 18
of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the High Court could have
granted declaration to caste ‘Gowari’ as ‘Gond Gowari’ entitled for Scheduled Tribe
certificate?
6) Whether the High Court is correct in its view that ‘Gond Gowari’ shown as Item
No.28 in Entry 18 of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 is not a
sub-tribe of Gond, hence, its validity cannot be tested on the basis of affinity test
specified in Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985?
41. The Constitution of India contains ample provisions for fulfilment of the Constitutional
aspirations of social justice to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and to socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens. Articles 341 and 342 and Part XIV of the Constitution
contains several provisions as special provisions relating to certain classes. Article 342 of the
Constitution envisages public notification specifying the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
14

groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall be for the purposes of this Constitution be
deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State after consultation with Governor thereof.
Sub-clause (2) contains another important provision which provides that any inclusion or exclusion
from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) of Article 342 can
be done only by Parliament by law. Sub-clause (2) of Article 342, thus, contains a provision
conferring authority only to the Parliament to include and exclude a Scheduled Tribe in the list as
specified in the sub-clause (1) of Article 342. There has been a series of judgments of this Court
including Constitution Benches on Articles 341 and 342 as well as entries in Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950. This Court had occasion to consider as to what extent the Courts
including the High court and this Court could interpret the entries in Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Orders. The High Court has heavily relied on Constitution Bench judgment of this
Court in B.Basavalingappa Vs. D. Munichinnappa and Ors., AIR 1965 SC 1269.
42. We may first notice the above judgment. An Election Petition was filed challenging the election
of respondent No.1 on the ground that respondent No.1 not being member of any Scheduled Castes
mentioned in Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 could not have contested the election
from Scheduled Caste Constituency. The respondent claimed that he belongs to a Scheduled Caste
listed as Bhovi in the Order. the appellant’s case was that respondent No.1 was a Voddar by caste,
which was not a Scheduled Caste. The Election Tribunal held that the caste mentioned as Bhovi in
the Scheduled Castes Order was a sub- caste amongst the Voddars and the entire Voddar caste not
being included as Scheduled Caste, the respondent NO.1 was ineligible. The election was set aside.
On appeal, High Court held that Voddars caste as such was not included in the Order, but
considering the facts and circumstances in existence at the time when the Order was passed in 1950,
the Bhovi caste mentioned therein was no other than Voddar caste. The High Court allowed the
appeal, against which judgment, appeal was filed in this Court. The Constitution Bench of this Court
speaking through Wanchoo, J. held that it is not open to make any modification in the Order by
producing evidence to show that though caste A alone is mentioned in the Order, caste B is also a
part of caste A. The ratio of the judgment is clearly discernible from paragraph 6 of the judgment,
which is to the following effect:-
“6. It may be accepted that it is not open to make any modification in the Order by
producing evidence to show (for example) that though caste A alone is mentioned in
the Order, caste B is also a part of caste A and therefore must be deem to be included
in caste A. It may also be accepted that wherever one caste has another name it has
been mentioned in brackets after it in the Order [see Aray (Mala) Dakkal
(Dokkalwar) etc.].
Therefore, generally speaking it would not be open to any person to lead evidence to establish that
caste B (in the example quoted above) is part of caste A notified in the Order. Ordinarily therefore it
would not have been open in the present case to give evidence that the Voddar caste was the same as
the Bhovi caste specified in the Order for Voddar caste is not mentioned in brackets after the Bhovi
caste in the Order.”
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
15

43. After noticing the above preposition in paragraph 6, this Court noticed the peculiar
circumstances of the case where in the Mysore State as it was before reorganisation of 1956, there
was no caste known as Bhovi at all. This Court, however, further emphasised that “if there was a
caste known as Bhovi as such in the Mysore State as it existed before 1956, evidence could not be
given to prove that any other caste was included in the Bhovi caste”. In the above case, this Court,
however, further held that when the undisputed fact is that there was no caste specifically known as
Bhovi in the Mysore State and when one finds mentioned in the Order, one has to determine which
was the caste which was meant. In paragraph 7 of the judgement, following has been laid down:-
“7. But that in our opinion does not conclude the matter in the peculiar
circumstances of the present case. The difficult in the present case arises from the
fact (which was not disputed before the High Court) that in the Mysore State as it was
before the re-organisation of 1956 there was no caste known as Bhovi at all. The
Order refers to a Scheduled caste known as Bhovi in the Mysore State as it was before
1956 and therefore it must be accepted that there was some caste which the President
intended to include after consultation with the Rajpramukh in the order, when the
Order mentions the caste Bhovi as a scheduled caste. It cannot be accepted that the
President included the caste Bhovi in the order though there was no such caste at all
in the Mysore State as it existed before 1956. But when it is not disputed that there
was no caste specifically known as Bhovi in the Mysore State before 1956, the only
course open to Courts to find out which casts was meant by Bhovi is to take evidence
in that behalf. If there was a caste known as Bhovi as such in the Mysore State as it
existed before 1956, evidence could not be given to prove that any other caste was
included in the Bhovi caste. But when the undisputed fact is that there was no caste
specifically known as Bhovi in the Mysore State as it existed before 1956 and one
finds a caste mentioned as Bhovi in the Order, one has to determine which was the
caste which was meant by that word on its inclusion in the Order. It is this Peculiar
circumstance, therefore, which necessitated the taking of evidence to determine
which was the caste which was meant by the word 'Bhovi' used in the Order, when no
caste was specifically known as Bhovi in the Mysore State before the re-organisation
of 1956.”
44. Shri Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant has placed much reliance on
paragraph 7 of the judgment and has contended that this Court approved the exercise undertaken by
the High Court to find out which was the Bhovi caste, which was included in the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, hence, an evidence was rightly looked into by the High Court,
which received approval by this Court. Shri Rohatgi further submits that although in the B.
Basavalingappa’s case the factum that there was no caste in the Mysore State before reorganisation
known as Bhovi at all was not disputed but the fact that whether it is disputed or not disputed shall
not make any difference, whenever the issue is raised that has been answered by the Courts looking
into the evidence.
45. The observations made by this Court in paragraph 7 in no manner dilutes the ratio of the
judgment as laid down in paragraph 6 quoted above. This Court approved the High Court exercise of
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
16

looking into the evidence to determine which was the caste which was meant by the word “Bhovi” in
the Order in the peculiar circumstances of the case where the fact was not disputed that there was
no caste known as Bhovi in the Mysore State before 1956. In paragraph 7, these following two
observations made by this Court are in full accord with the ratio as laid down in paragraph 6, they
are:-
“7. ………………………..It cannot be accepted that the President included the caste
Bhovi in the order though there was no such caste at all in the Mysore State as it
existed before 1956.
……………………………………………………………………. If there was a caste known as Bhovi
as such in the Mysore State as it existed before 1956, evidence could not be given to
prove that any other caste was included in the Bhovi caste. ………………………………”
46. In the present case, the case of the respondent in the writ petition was categorical
that Gond Gowari was a caste which was in existence since before 25.09.1956. Even
the High Court in the impugned judgment has said that caste Gond Gowari did not
exist prior to 1956 rather the High Court held that caste was there but it became
extinct prior to 1911.
Thus, the circumstances in which this Court in B. Basavalingappa’s case approved the looking of the
evidence were peculiar to that case and has no application in the facts of the present case.
47. We may notice another Constitution Bench judgment in Bhaiya Lal Vs. Harikishan Singh and
Ors., AIR 1965 SC 1557, which was delivered few months after judgment of B. Basavalingappa’s case,
noted the ratio of judgment and reiterated that though the appellant was not a Scheduled Caste as
enumerated in the Scheduled Castes Order but he belonged to another caste, which is sub-caste of
Scheduled Caste, cannot be looked into. In the above case, Bhaiya Lal was elected from reserved
seat. Election was challenged on the ground that Bhaiya Lal belonged to Dohar caste and was not a
Chamar. Bhaiya Lal in his nomination has declared that he was member of Chamar Scheduled
Caste. Election Tribunal found against the elected candidate and set aside the election. The High
Court dismissed the appeal. Bhaiya Lal questioned the judgment of the High Court as well as the
Election Tribunal. The case of the appellant was that he was a Dohar Chamar, which is a sub-caste of
Chamar Scheduled Caste. This Court held that the claim that Dohar caste is a sub-caste of Chamar
caste cannot be entertained. in paragraph 8 following has been laid down:-
“8. Incidentally, we may point out that the plea that the Dohar caste is a sub- caste of
the Chamar caste cannot be entertained in the present proceedings in view of the
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950. This Order has been issued by the
President under Article 341 of the Constitution. Article 341(1) provides that the
President may with respect to any State or Union Territory, and where it is a State,
after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, specify the
castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races, or tribes which shall
for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
17

that State or Union Territory, as the case may be. Sub-article (2) lays down that
Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled Castes
specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of or
group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under
the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification. It is thus clear, that
in order to determine whether or not a particular caste is a scheduled caste within the
meaning of Article 341, one has to look at the public notification issued by the
President in that behalf. In the present case, the notification refers to Chamar, Jatav
or Mochi, and so, in dealing with the question in dispute between the parties, the
enquiry which the Election Tribunal can hold is whether or not the appellant is a
Chamar, Jatav or Mochi. The plea that though the appellant is not a Chamar as such,
he can claim the same status by reason of the fact that he belongs to the Dohar caste
which is a sub-
caste of the Chamar caste, cannot be accepted. It appears to us that an enquiry of this kind would
not be permissible having regard to the provisions contained in Article 341. In the case of B.
Basavalingappa v. D. Munichinnappa this Court had occasion to consider a similar question. The
question which arose for decision in that case was whether Respondent 1, though Voddar by caste,
belonged to the scheduled caste of Bhovi mentioned in the Order, and while holding that an enquiry
into the said question was permissible, the Court has elaborately referred to the special and unusual
circumstances which justified the High Court in holding that Voddar caste was the same as the
Bhovi caste within the meaning of the Order; otherwise the normal rule would be:
“it may be accepted that it is not open to make any modification in the Order by
producing evidence to show, for example, that though caste A alone is mentioned in
the Order, caste B is also a part of caste A and, therefore, must be deemed to be
included in caste A.” That is another reason why the plea made by the appellant that
the Dohar caste is a sub-caste of the Chamar caste and as such must be deemed to be
included in the Order, cannot be accepted.”
48. In Bhaiya Lal’s case, the Constitution Bench reiterated the ratio of B. Basavalingappa’s case in
following words:-
“it may be accepted that it is not open to make any modification in the Order by
producing evidence to show, for example, that though caste A alone is mentioned in
the Order, caste B is also a part of caste A and, therefore, must be deemed to be
included in caste A.”
49. We may notice few more judgments of this Court where the law on the subject was explained
and reiterated. In Srish Kumar Choudhury Vs. State of Tripura and Ors., 1990 Supp SCC 220, this
Court had occasion to consider Article 342. In the above case, the appellant had filed an application
in a representative capacity before the High Court claiming that he belonged to Laskar community,
which has always been treated in the erstwhile State of Tripura as a Scheduled Tribe. The writ
petition was dismissed by the High Court against which the appeal was filed. This Court referred to
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
18

earlier two Constitution Bench judgments in B. Basavalingappa’s case and Bhaiya Lal’s case. The
observations made by the Constitution Bench in B. Basavalingappa’s case and Bhaiya Lal’s case were
extracted in paragraphs 8, 9 and 10. In paragraph 9, Three Judge Bench quoted the extract from
Bhaiya Lal’s judgment and in paragraph 11, it was held that the ratio of judgment of Bhaiya Lal’s
case supports the view of earlier judgment of Constitution Bench in B. Basavalingappa’s case. In
paragraphs 10 and 11, following has been laid down;-
“10. A similar dispute again came before a Constitution Bench in Bhaiyalal v.
Harikishan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1557 with reference to a scheduled tribe in an election dispute.
Gajendragadkar, C.J. speaking for the court said : (SCR pp.
882-83) “It is obvious that in specifying castes, races or tribes, the President has been expressly
authorised to limit the notification to parts of or groups within the castes, races or tribes, and that
must mean that after examining the educational and social backwardness of a caste, race or tribe,
the President may well come to the conclusion that not the whole caste, race or tribe but parts of or
groups within them should be specified. Similarly, the President can specify castes, races or tribes or
parts thereof in relation not only to the entire State, but in relation to parts of the State where he is
satisfied that the examination of the social and educational backwardness of the race, caste or tribe
justifies such specification. In fact, it is well known that before a notification is issued under Article
341(1), an elaborate enquiry is made and it is as a result of this enquiry that social justice is sought to
be done to the castes, races or tribes as may appear to be necessary, and in doing justice, it would
obviously be expedient not only to specify parts or groups of castes, races or tribes, but to make the
said specification by reference to different areas in the State.”
11. What we have extracted above clearly supports the view of the other Constitution Bench, namely,
the list is intended to be final.”
50. The Three Judge Bench reiterated that Courts cannot enter into an enquiry to determine
whether the three terms indicated in the Presidential Order include Deshi Tripura which covers the
Laskar community. In paragraph 20, following was laid down:-
“20. The two Constitution Bench judgments indicate that enquiry is contemplated
before the Presidential Order is made but any amendment to the Presidential Order
can only be by legislation. We do not think we should assume jurisdiction and enter
into an enquiry to determine whether the three terms indicated in the Presidential
Order include Deshi Tripura which covers the Laskar community;
……………………………………” This Court also reiterated that enquiry is contemplated
before the Presidential Order is made.
51. The next judgment to be noticed is Palghat Jilla Thandan Smudhaya Samrakshna Samithi and
Anr. Vs. State of Kerala and Anr., (1994) 1 SCC 359. In the above case, a writ petition was filed
claiming that the petitioner belonged to Thandan community, therefore, a Scheduled Caste
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
19

certificate be issued. The writ petition was allowed, however, the petitioner was denied admission in
M.B.B.S. course in seat reserved for Scheduled Caste on the ground that she was not a Thandan. A
Three Judge Bench of this Court after noticing the ratio of earlier two Constitution Bench judgments
has held that the Court could not assume the jurisdiction and order an enquiry to determine
whether the terms of the Presidential Order includes a particular community. In paragraphs 17 and
18, following was laid down:-
“17. We may usefully draw attention to the judgment of a Bench of three learned
Judges of this Court in Srish Kumar Choudhury v. State of Tripura, 1990 Supp SCC
220. This judgment considered the Constitution Bench judgments in B.
Basavalingappa v. D. Munichinnappa, AIR 1965 SC 1269 and Bhaiyalal v. Harikishan
Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1557 and certain other judgments. It held that the two
Constitution Bench judgments indicated that any amendment to the Presidential
Orders could only be by legislation. The Court could not assume jurisdiction and
order an enquiry to determine whether the terms of the Presidential Order included a
particular community. A State Government was entitled to initiate appropriate
proposals for modification in cases where it was satisfied that modifications were
necessary and, if after appropriate enquiry, the authorities were satisfied that a
modification was required, an amendment could be undertaken as provided by the
Constitution.
18. These judgments leave no doubt that the Scheduled Castes Order has to be
applied as it stands and no enquiry can be held or evidence let in to determine
whether or not some particular community falls within it or outside it. No action to
modify the plain effect of the Scheduled Castes Order, except as contemplated by
Article 341, is valid.”
52. A Two Judge Bench in Kumari Madhuri Patil and Anr. Vs. Addl. Commissioner, Tribal
Development and Ors., (1994) 6 SCC 241 had occasion to consider the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 as applicable to State of Maharashtra. In Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950, caste “Mahadeo Koli” was included. The appellants claimed that they were entitled to
Scheduled Tribe certificate of Mahadeo Koli whereas caste was shown in admission register as
“Hindu Koli”. The Scheduled Caste certificate was refused. A writ petition was filed in the High
Court, which was dismissed against which the matter came to this Court. This Court held that
Scheduled Caste notified was Mahadeo Koli and the petitioners being Hindu Koli were not entitled
for the Scheduled Tribes certificate. In paragraph 9, following has been laid down:-
“9. …………………………………………………………….It is common knowledge that
endeavour of States to fulfil constitutional mandate of upliftment of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes by providing for reservation of seats in educational institutions
and for reservation of posts and appointments, are sought to be denied to them by
unscrupulous persons who come forward to obtain the benefit of such reservations
posing themselves as persons entitled to such status while in fact disentitled to such
status. The case in hand is a clear instance of such pseudo- status. Kolis have been
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
20

declared to be OBC in the State of Maharashtra being fishermen, in that their
avocation is fishing and they live mainly in the coastal region of Maharashtra.
Mahadeo Kolis are hill tribes and it is not a sub- caste. Even prior to independence,
the Maharashtra Government declared Mahadeo Koli to be criminal tribe as early as
29- 5-1933 in Serial No. 15 in List II thereof. In 1942 Resolution in Serial No. 15 in
Schedule B of the Bombay resolution Mahadeo Koli tribe was notified as a Scheduled
Tribe. It was later amended as Serial No. 13. In the Presidential Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950, it was reiterated. A slight modification was
made in that behalf by the Presidential Notification dated 29-10-
1956. In the 1976 Amendment Act, there is no substantial change except removing the area
restriction. Thus Mahadeo Koli, a Scheduled Tribe continued to be a Scheduled Tribe even after
independence. The Presidential Notification, 1950 also does recognise by public notification of their
status as Scheduled Tribes. The assumption of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Subhash Ganpatrao Kabade case1, that Mahadeo Koli was recognised for the first time in 1976 under
Amendment Act, 1976, as Scheduled Tribe is not relatable to reality and an erroneous assumption
made without any attempt to investigate the truth in that behalf. Presidential declaration, subject to
amendment by Parliament being conclusive, no addition to it or declaration of castes/tribes or sub-
castes/parts of or groups of tribes or tribal communities is permissible.”
53. A Three Judge Bench in Nityanand Sharma and Anr. Vs. State of Bihar and Ors., (1996) 3 SCC
576 had also considered the similar question. The question which was up for consideration has been
noted in paragraph 2 of the judgment to the following effect:-
“2. Short but an important question of constitutional law of the power of the court to
declare a particular tribe to be Scheduled Tribe under Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950 as amended by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Orders (Amendment Act), 1976 (for short “the Act”) is the primary question.”
54. The petitioner in the above case belonged to Lohar community. They claimed Scheduled Tribe
certificate. The State resisted the claim that Lohar in State of Bihar is recognised as Other Backward
Class and not Scheduled Tribe. The entry in the Scheduled Tribe Order mentioned Lohara/Lohra.
This Court held that the question which is up for consideration is no longer res integra and is
covered by ratio of the Constitution Bench judgment in Bhaiya Lal and B. Basavalingappa case. In
paragraphs 13 and 15, following was laid down:-
“13. The question then is: Whether Lohars could be considered by the Court as
synonyms of Loharas or Lohras? This question is no longer res integra. In Bhaiyalal
v. Harikishan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1557 a Constitution Bench of this Court had
considered in an election petition whether Dadar caste was a Scheduled Caste. It held
that the President in specifying a caste, race or tribe has expressly been authorised to
limit the notification to parts of or groups within the caste, race or tribes. It must
mean that after examining the social and educational backwardness of a caste, race or
a tribe, the President may come to the conclusion that not the whole caste, race or
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
21

tribe, but parts of or groups within them should be specified as Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe. The result of the specification is conclusive. Notification issued
under Article 341(1), after an elaborate enquiry in consultation with the Governor
and reaching the conclusion specifying particular caste, race or tribe with reference to
different areas in the State, is conclusive. The same view was reiterated in B.
Basavalingappa v. D. Munichinnappa, AIR 1965 SC 1269.
15. It is for Parliament to amend the law and the Schedule and include in and exclude
from the Schedule, a tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or
tribal community for the State, District or region and its declaration is conclusive.
The Court has no power to declare synonyms as equivalent to the Tribes specified in
the Order or include in or substitute any caste/tribe etc. It would thus be clear that
for the purpose of the Constitution, “Scheduled Tribes” defined under Article 366(25)
as substituted (sic) under the Act, and the Second Schedule thereunder are
conclusive.
Though evidence may be admissible to a limited extent of finding out whether the community which
claims the status as Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, was, in fact, included in the Schedule
concerned, the Court is devoid of power to include in or exclude from or substitute or declare
synonyms to be of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or parts thereof or group of such caste or
tribe.”
55. Rejecting the claim of Lohar as Scheduled Tribe, following was laid down in paragraphs 18 and
20:-
“18. It is seen that in the Second Schedule in Part III of the Act, as extracted
hereinbefore, Lohar was not included as a Scheduled Tribe. It is only, as evidenced
from the translated version, that the community ‘Lohar’ came to be wrongly
translated for the word ‘Lohra’ or ‘Lohara’ and shown to have been included in the
Second Schedule, Part III, applicable to Bihar State. Mr. B.B. Singh, therefore, is right
in placing before us the original version in English and the translated version.
20. Accordingly, we hold that Lohars are an Other Backward Class. They are not
Scheduled Tribes and the Court cannot give any declaration that Lohars are
equivalent to Loharas or Lohras or that they are entitled to the same status. Any
contrary view taken by any Bench/Benches of Bihar High Court, is erroneous. It
would appear that except some stray cases, there is a consistent view of that Court
that Lohars are not Scheduled Tribes. They are blacksmiths. We approve the said
view laying down the correct law.”
56. Now, we come to a subsequent Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State of
Maharashtra Vs. Milind and Ors., (2001) 1 SCC 4. Before the Constitution Bench, two questions
arose, which are noted in paragraph 1 of the judgment to the following effect:-
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
22

“In this appeal, the following two questions arise for consideration:
(1) Whether at all, it is permissible to hold inquiry and let in evidence to decide or
declare that any tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or
tribal community is included in the general name even though it is not specifically
mentioned in the entry concerned in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950?
(2) Whether “Halba-Koshti” caste is a sub-
tribe within the meaning of Entry 19 (Halba/Halbi) of the said Scheduled Tribes Order relating to
the State of Maharashtra, even though it is not specifically mentioned as such?”
57. Entry 19 of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 as applicable in the State of
Maharashtra was Halba/Halbi. The claim was raised by another caste Halba-Koshti that they are
also entitled for issue of Scheduled Tribe certificate. The caste certificate of the respondent was
rejected by the Caste Scrutiny Committee against which an appeal was filed, which was dismissed
holding that respondent No.1 belonged to Koshti and did not belong to Halba/Halbi Scheduled
Tribe. Writ petition was filed by respondent No.1, which was allowed by the High Court holding that
it was permissible to enquire whether any sub-division of a tribe was a part and parcel of the tribe
mentioned therein and that 'Halba-Koshti' is a subdivision of main tribe 'Halba'/'Halbi' as per Entry
No. 19 in the Scheduled Tribe Order applicable to Maharashtra. In paragraph 5 of the judgment,
following was held by this Court:-
“5. The High Court allowed the writ petition and quashed the impugned orders inter
alia holding that it was permissible to inquire whether any subdivision of a tribe was
a part and parcel of the tribe mentioned therein and that “Halba-Koshti” is a
subdivision of main tribe “Halba/Halbi” as per Entry 19 in the Scheduled Tribes
Order applicable to Maharashtra. Hence the State of Maharashtra has come up in
appeal by special leave, questioning the validity and correctness of the order of the
High Court allowing the writ petition of Respondent 1.”
58. This Court after noticing the constitutional provisions held that it is not possible
to say that State Governments or any other authority or courts or tribunals are vested
with any power to modify or vary the Scheduled Tribes Orders. This Court also held
that no enquiry is permissible and no evidence can be let in for establishing that a
particular caste or part or group within tribes or tribe is included in Presidential
Order if they are not expressly included. In paragraph 12, following has been laid
down:-
“12. ……………………………………….It appears that the object of clause (1) of Articles 341
and 342 was to keep away disputes touching whether a caste/tribe is a Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe or not for the purpose of the Constitution. Whether a
particular caste or a tribe is Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe as the case may be,
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
23

within the meaning of the entries contained in the Presidential Orders issued under
clause (1) of Articles 341 and 342, is to be determined looking to them as they are.
Clause (2) of the said articles does not permit any one to seek modification of the said
orders by leading evidence that the caste/Tribe (A) alone is mentioned in the Order
but caste/Tribe (B) is also a part of caste/Tribe (A) and as such caste/Tribe (B)
should be deemed to be a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe as the case may be. It is
only Parliament that is competent to amend the Orders issued under Articles 341 and
342. As can be seen from the entries in the schedules pertaining to each State
whenever one caste/tribe has another name it is so mentioned in the brackets after it
in the schedules. In this view it serves no purpose to look at gazetteers or glossaries
for establishing that a particular caste/tribe is a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe for
the purpose of Constitution, even though it is not specifically mentioned as such in
the Presidential Orders. Orders once issued under clause (1) of the said articles,
cannot be varied by subsequent order or notification even by the President except by
law made by Parliament. Hence it is not possible to say that State Governments or
any other authority or courts or Tribunals are vested with any power to modify or
vary the said Orders. If that be so, no inquiry is permissible and no evidence can be
let in for establishing that a particular caste or part or group within tribes or tribe is
included in Presidential Order if they are not expressly included in the Orders. Since
any exercise or attempt to amend the Presidential Order except as provided in clause
(2) of Articles 341 and 342 would be futile, holding any inquiry or letting in any
evidence in that regard is neither permissible nor useful.”
59. The Constitution Bench reiterated that the power to include or exclude, amend or
alter the Presidential Order is expressly and exclusively conferred on and vested with
the Parliament and Courts cannot and should not extend jurisdiction to deal with the
question as to whether a particular caste or sub-caste or group or part of tribe is
included in any one of the entries mentioned in the Presidential Order. Following was
laid down in paragraph 15:-
“15. Thus it is clear that States have no power to amend Presidential Orders.
Consequently, a party in power or the Government of the day in a State is relieved
from the pressure or burden of tinkering with the Presidential Orders either to gain
popularity or secure votes. Number of persons in order to gain advantage in securing
admissions in educational institutions and employment in State services have been
claiming as belonging to either Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes depriving
genuine and needy persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
covered by the Presidential Orders, defeating and frustrating to a large extent the
very object of protective discrimination given to such people based on their
educational and social backwardness. Courts cannot and should not expand
jurisdiction to deal with the question as to whether a particular caste, sub-caste; a
group or part of tribe or sub-tribe is included in any one of the entries mentioned in
the Presidential Orders issued under Articles 341 and 342 particularly so when in
clause (2) of the said article, it is expressly stated that the said Orders cannot be
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
24

amended or varied except by law made by Parliament. The power to include or
exclude, amend or alter Presidential Order is expressly and exclusively conferred on
and vested with Parliament and that too by making a law in that regard. The
President had the benefit of consulting the States through Governors of States which
had the means and machinery to find out and recommend as to whether a particular
caste or tribe was to be included in the Presidential Order. If the said Orders are to be
amended, it is Parliament that is in a better position to know having the means and
machinery unlike courts as to why a particular caste or tribe is to be included or
excluded by law to be made by Parliament. Allowing the State Governments or courts
or other authorities or Tribunals to hold inquiry as to whether a particular caste or
tribe should be considered as one included in the schedule of the Presidential Order,
when it is not so specifically included, may lead to problems………………………………….”
60. It is further to be noticed that Constitution Bench in Milind’s case (supra) has
noted the ratio of earlier two Constitution Bench judgments in B. Basavalingappa’s
case and Bhaiya Lal’s case and in paragraph 28 has reaffirmed the ration of above
two Constitution Bench judgments. In paragraph 28, following is laid down:-
“28. Being in respectful agreement, we reaffirm the ratio of the two Constitution
Bench judgments aforementioned and state in clear terms that no inquiry at all is
permissible and no evidence can be let in, to find out and decide that if any tribe or
tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community is included
within the scope and meaning of the entry concerned in the Presidential Order when
it is not so expressly or specifically included. Hence, we answer Question 1 in the
negative.”
61. In view of the ratio of judgments of this Court as noticed above, the conclusion is
inescapable that the High Court could not have entertained the claim or looked into
the evidences to find out and decide that tribe “Gowari” is part of Scheduled Tribe
“Gond Gowari”, which is included in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950. It is further clear that there is no conflict in the ratio of Constitution Bench
judgments of this Court in B. Basavalingappa’s case and State of Maharashtra Vs.
Milind and Ors.(supra). The ratio of B. Basavalingappa’s case as noted in paragraph 6
of the judgment and extracted above is reiterated by subsequent two Constitution
Bench judgments in Bhaiya Lal’s case and Milind’s case. There being no conflict in
the ratio of the above Three Constitution Bench judgments, we do not find any
substance in submission of Shri Rohatgi that for resolving the conflict, the matter
need to be referred to a larger Constitution Bench. We, thus, answer question Nos.1
and 2 in following words:-
(i) The High Court in the writ petition giving rise to these appeals could not have
entertained the claim of a caste “Gowari” that it be declared a Scheduled Tribe as
“Gond Gowari” included at Entry No.18 of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
1950 nor High Court could have taken evidence to adjudicate the above claim.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
25

(ii) There is no conflict in the ratio of the judgment of Constitution Bench of this
Court in Basavalingappa’s case and Milind’s case.
Both the above questions being inter-related are being taken together.
62. The Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" as existing in Item No.28 of Entry 18 of Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 applicable to State of Maharashtra is continuing in the List of
Scheduled Tribes of Bombay State (now State of Maharashtra) since 29.10.1956. To a large number
of members of the "Gond Gowari" caste Scheduled Tribe certificates have been issued by the
competent authority in the State of Maharashtra from time to time. In Writ Petition No.4779 of
2008(Adivasi Gond Govari(Gowari) Sewa Mandal through its President vs. State of Maharashtra
and others) the writ petitioner has prayed for quashing and setting aside the caste validity
certificates issued in the name of respondent Nos. 4 to 19 as "Gond Gowari", Scheduled Tribe. The
fact that before the High Court there was a writ petition where caste certificates granted to 16
respondents of "Gond Gowari" were sought to be quashed clearly proved the existence of community
"Gond Gowari". Although there have been recommendations by the State of Maharashtra earlier in
the year 1967 and thereafter in the year 1979 to include the “Gowari” as Scheduled Tribe, the said
recommendations were never accepted by the Parliament since in spite of passing of several
Amendment Acts by the Parliament to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 Entry of
"Gond Gowari" in the Scheduled Tribe was never deleted. A private bill to delete Entry of "Gond
Gowari" and substitute it by Gowari was not passed by the Parliament and turned down. The High
Court has also referred to and relied on the book “Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of
India by R.V. Russell and Rai Bahadur Hira Lal wherein castes "Gond Gowari" and “Gowari” were
separately dealt with as distinct castes. It is also on the record that the State of Maharashtra even
though it had recommended vide letters dated 26.03.1979 and 12.06.1979 to include Gowari in the
list of Scheduled Tribes but on 06.11.1981 State of Maharashtra wrote to Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi where dealing with the subject of the Scheduled Tribes in paragraph 3(iii) following was
stated:
“3(iii) Following tribes do not fulfill the criteria of S.Ts and hence State Government
does not consider it necessary to include them in the list of S.Ts of this State and
hence their inclusion is not recommended:
1) Otari
2) Gowari
3). Dhangar
4). Mana”
63. Thus, the State Government recommended Gowari not to be included as they
having not fulfilled criteria of Scheduled Tribe. It is to be noted that in letter dated
26.03.1979 of the Government of Maharashtra to the Union of India although
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
26

recommendation was made to include Gowari in Scheduled Tribe but there was no
recommendation to delete "Gond Gowari" from the list of Scheduled Tribes. In letter
dated 26.03.1979 with regard to Gowari, following statement was made:
“III] GOWARI: The community is at present included in the list of Scheduled Tribes,
as "Gond Gowari". It has been represented to Government that Gowari community is
not a sub-group of the tribe, Gond, but is is a separate tribe in itself. The State
Government had accordingly recommended to the Government of India to show the
Gowari tribe separately. A copy of Chief Minister's D.O. Letter dated 27.1.1967 is
enclosed. The tribe Gowari may now be included, as a separate tribe. The Joint
Committee on the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders(Amendment) Bill
1967, had recommended the inclusion of the community as a separate tribe for
Vidarbha area.”
64. Thus, the recommendation to include Gowari as a separate Scheduled Tribe was
forwarded by the State of Maharashtra in the year 1979 which was withdrawn in 1981
and after 1981 the State's stand has been that "Gond Gowari" and “Gowari” are two
separate castes and Gowari is not entitled for the benefit of Scheduled Tribe
certificate. The Government of State of Maharashtra, Tribal Development
Department has issued G.R. dated 24.04.1985 where the State Government has
referred to "Gond Gowari" as small sub-Tribe of Gond and non-Scheduled Tribe caste
was referred as Gowari. Along with the Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985 a
comparative Chart was annexed of Scheduled Tribe and non-Scheduled Tribe
community which was claiming benefit. It is useful to extract comparative table
which was part of Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985 which is to the following
effect:
Number of General Non- General Traditio Remarks Scheduled information of
scheduled places of nal and tribe from residence of Caste/trib residence, Occupati
general the list and Scheduled e which approximate on of informat the tribe, tribes,
can obtain population Non- ion correspondin corresponding Caste and other
schedule g tribe or tribes, sub- Certificat general d sub-tribe on tribe and e by
information Caste/Tr that number native place, showing of Non- ibe population of
the scheduled corresponding similarity Caste/Tribe tribe, sub- of names tribe and
other (From general column information No.3) of Scheduled tribes, correspond ing
tribes 8 (18) Gond There is a Govari, The Their There is Govari small sub tribe
Gavari, population main no of Gond tribe. Gaygovari, of Govari, occupati social There
is no Milk- Gavari ons are relation separate Govari should be 2 Farming, of mention
of lakhs. This Cow- Govari population of caste is Animal and this sub-tribe. spread
Farming, correspo Their mainly in Producti nding population is Nagpur, on of tribes
merged in Amravati, Milk, with population of Wardha, Husbandr Gond Gond tribe.
Yavatmal, y. tribe.
              This tribe is                    Bhandara,                   There is
              found          in                Chandrapur,                 no
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
27

              Kurkheda                         Gaadchiroli                 traditio
              Taluka,                          districts.                  nal,
              Gadchiroli                       “Krishna,                   heredita
              district.                        Ganga,                      ry,
              People       from                Jamuna” are                 language
              Gond tribe who                   the                         ,
              do        animal                 worshipping                 marital
              farming       are                god/goddesse                relation
              called         by                s   of   this               s
              locals      “Gond                tribe.                      between
              Govari.        In                Kade-Kodevan                them.
              1901,       their                is      their               Gond
              population     in                main     God.               Govar do
              Chandrapur                       They     have               not milk
              district      was                caste                       the
              3000.   As they                  panchayat                   cows.
              belong to Gond                   and       its               They
              tribe,      their                chief      is               only do
              language,                        called                      animal
              social      life,                “Gondya”.                   farming.
              customs,                         They do not                 Instead
              traditions,                      marry in the                Govari
              religious                        same    clan.               tribe do
              rituals       are                Clans    such               the
              that of Gond.                    as     Tohar,               producti
              Clan,     Family                 Ambadare,                   on of
              god/goddess,                     Kohachya,                   milk.
              surnames      and                Ravat,                      Due to
              other is same                    Sakhena,                    the
              as    that     of                Thakare,                    similari
               Gond.                        Sonavane.              ty of
                                                                   name of
                                                                   “Gavari”
                                                                   word,
                                                                   people
                                                                   of
                                                                   “Govari,
                                                                   Gavari”
                                                                   obtain
                                                                   the
                                                                   Schedule
                                                                   d tribe
                                                                   certific
                                                                   ate to
                                                                   take the
                                                                   benefits
                                                                   of the
                                                                   tribe.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
28

65. The   above    materials       which    were    on    the   record
before the High Court as well as continuance of "Gond Gowari" as Scheduled Tribe in
the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 for the last more than 60 years, it
was not open for the High Court to proceed into the inquiry as to whether Scheduled
Tribe "Gond Gowari" is not in existence.
66. The High Court in the impugned judgment has formulated three questions in
paragraph 31 of the judgment which is to the following effect:
“Therefore, the questions involved in all these cases are threefold as under:
(1) Is it permissible for this Court to hold that it is the Gowari community alone
which is meant by 28th Item "Gond Gowari"
in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order?, (2) Whether there existed any tribe as "Gond
Gowari" as on 29-10-1956, i.e. the date of its inclusion as 28th Item in Entry No. 18 of the said
Order, other than Gond and Gowari?, (3) If there did not exist as such any tribe as "Gond Gowari",
whether it was Gowari community alone which was included as 28th Item in Entry No.18 of the said
Order?”
67. The High Court referring to this Court’s judgment in B. Basavalingappa proceeded to enter into
the material produced by the respondents to the writ petition as to whether "Gond Gowari" were not
in existence prior to their inclusion in Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. We have already
held that the ratio of B. Basavalingappa judgment did not permit the High Court to enter into the
issue as to whether a Tribe which is included in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 did
not exist. The High Court proceeded to answer to question Nos. 2 and 3 as noted above in
paragraphs 34 to 57.
68. Now, we proceed to consider the reasons given by the High Court in coming to the conclusion
that Tribe "Gond Gowari" became extinct prior to 1911. The High Court in paragraphs 41 to 43 of the
judgment has noticed the Census of India 1891. The High Court itself in the aforesaid paragraphs
have noted that Census of 1891 separate figures were given of “Gowari” and "Gond Gowari". In
paragraph 43 following observations have been made by the High Court:
“43......The separate population figures of Gowaris and "Gond Gowari"s in the four
districts of (i)Nagpur, (ii) Wardha, (iii)Chanda, and (iv) Bhandara in Nagpur Division
were shown in the Table XIII in the Census Report of 1891. The strength of Gowaris
and "Gond Gowari"s in the said Census was shown in Nagpur as 13,491 and 11, in
Wardha as 10,397 and 60, in Chanda 11,217 and 19, in Bhandara 49212 and 335
respectively in the part of C.P. and Berar.”
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
29

69. The High Court has also noticed the Census of 1901 and noticed that in Nagpur Division the total
population of “Gowari” and "Gond Gowari" was mentioned. Gowari was mentioned as 91,632 and
whereas "Gond Gowari"s were mentioned in five Districts of Nagpur Division as 2,553. The High
Court then proceeded to examine the Census of 1911 and it noticed that earlier classification of caste
according to their social precedents was changed reverting back to the past class classification of
1891 caste in according to traditional occupations, out of 37 main occupational groups, group IV was
of Forest and Hill Tribes and Group V was of Graziers and Dairymen. The High Court noticed that in
Census of 1911 Group V in Central Provinces mentioned Gowari as 157,580 but there was no
mention of "Gond Gowari". Similarly, Census of 1921 of Group V of Graziers and Dairymen was
noticed where Gowari was mentioned as 155,902. After noticing the aforesaid facts from Census the
High Court recorded its conclusion in paragraph 57 to the following effect:
“57. In our view, the tribe "Gond Gowari", which was a small hybrid caste formed by
an alliance of Gond and Gowaris was completely extinct before 1911 Census and no
trace of it was found either in the Maratha country of the C.P. and Berar or in the
State of Madhya Pradesh. We, therefore, hold that there did not exist any tribe as
"Gond Gowari" as on 29-10- 1956, i.e. the date of its inclusion as 28th Item in Entry
No. 18 of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order in relation to the State of
Maharashtra and it was Gowari community alone shown as "Gond Gowari". We,
therefore, answer the question Nos. (2) and (3) accordingly.”
70. The High Court itself has in its judgment noticed and found the mention of "Gond Gowari" in
Census of 1891 and 1901. The substantial figures of "Gond Gowari" in the above two Censuses in
Nagpur Division were noticed. The High Court itself having noticed that the basis of Census in 1911
was changed, classification was made on the basis of traditional occupation in which group IV was of
Forest and Hill Tribes and Group V was of Graziers and Dairymen, the figures of 1911, 1921 and 1931
have been noticed where in Group V Graziers and Dairymen, there was mention of Gowari. Mere
fact that in Censuses of 1911, 1921 and 1931 figures were given only of Group V, i.e., Graziers and
Dairymen and there was no mention of "Gond Gowari" cannot lead to conclusion that "Gond
Gowari" have become extinct before 1911. A Scheduled Tribe which admittedly was in existence and
had a distinct identity shall not be treated to have become extinct merely because the basis of
Census has been changed in the subsequent years. The benefit given to a Scheduled Tribe cannot be
taken away on the basis of figures given in Census operation only. There have been amendments in
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 from time to time. Several Tribes were deleted from
the list by the Act of Parliament and several new Tribes were included. There had been
recommendations by the Joint Committee of Parliament for exclusion of the Tribes which were
excluded if there was no return in respect of those communities in Censuses of 1961 and 1971. We
may refer to Statement of Objects and Reasons of The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Orders (Amendment) Bill, 1976 which has been stated:
".....The Committee had also recommended exclusion of certain communities from
the lists of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. These exclusions are not being
made at present and such communities are being retained in the lists with the
present area restrictions. Such of the communities in respect of which the Joint
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
30

Committee had recommended exclusion on the ground that there were no returns in
respect of these communities in the censuses of 1961 and 1971.”
71. The above clearly indicates that those Scheduled Tribes and Schedules Castes were excluded if
only there was no return in respect of Census of 1961 and 1971. We, thus, are of the view that the
whole basis of judgment of the High Court that Tribe "Gond Gowari" was extinct prior to 1911
Census and in subsequent Censuses 1911, 1921 and 1931 they were not shown in Group V is
completely flawed. The inclusion of sub-Tribe as "Gond Gowari" in the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950 was on 29.10.1956 when sub-Tribe "Gond Gowari" was included in the
Scheduled Tribe list it has to be presumed that the said inclusion was after consultation with the
State and after considering the relevant materials. The High Court could not have questioned the
inclusion of the Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950
on the basis of reasoning as adopted by the High Court. The High Court has referred to and relied on
the book “Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India” by R.V. Russell and Rai Bahadur Hira
Lal in which book in Volume III community Gond, "Gond Gowari" and Gowari were all separately
dealt with, describing "Gond Gowari" in Volume III Russell states:
“Gond-Gowari.--A small hybrid caste formed from alliances between Gonds and
Gowaris or herdsmen of the Maratha country. Though they must now be considered
as a distinct caste, being impure and thus ranking lower than either the Gonds or
Gowaris, they are still often identified with either of them.
In 1901 only 3000 were returned, principally from the Nagpur and Chanda Districts.
In 1911 they were amalgamated with the Gowaris, and this view may be accepted as
their origin is the same. The Gowaris say that the Gond-Gowaris are the descendants
of one of two brothers who accidentally ate the flesh of a cow. Both the Gonds and
Gowaris frequent the jungles for long periods together, and it is natural that
intimacies should spring up between the youth of either sex. And the progeny of these
irregular connections has formed a separate caste, looked down upon by both its
progenitors. The Gond-Gowaris have no subcastes, and for purposes of marriages are
divided into exogamous septs, all bearing Gond names. Like the Gonds, the caste is
also split into two divisions, worshipping six and seven gods respectively, and
members of septs worshipping the same number of gods must not marry with each
other.”
72. In the same Volume Gowari has been dealt with:
“Gowari.--The herdsman or grazier caste of the Maratha country, corresponding to
the Ahirs or Gaolis. The name is derived from gai or gao, the cow, and means a
cowherd. The Gowaris numbered more than 150,000 persons in 1911, of whom nearly
120,000 belonged to the Nagpur division and nearly 30,000 to Berar. In localities
where the Gowaris predominate, Ahirs or Gaolis, the regular herdsman caste,are
found only in small numbers. The honorific title of the Gowaris is Dhare, which is
said to mean 'One who keeps cattle.' The Gowaris rank distinctly below the Ahirs or
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
31

Gaolis.”
73. In the same Volume while describing the sub- Caste of Gowari following description is given:
“The Gowaris have three divisions, the Gai Gowari, Inga, and Maria or "Gond
Gowari". The Gai or cow Gowaris are the highest and probably have more Gaoli blood
in them. The Inga and Maria or "Gond Gowari"s are more directly derived from the
Gonds. Maria is the name given to a large section of the Gond tribe in Chanda. Both
the other two subcastes will take cooked food from the Gai Gowaris and the "Gond
Gowari"s from the Inga, but the Inga subcaste will not take it from the Gond, nor the
Gai Gowaris from either of the other two. The "Gond Gowari"s have been treated as a
distinct caste and a separate article is given on them, but at the census Mr. Marten
has amalgamated them with the Gowaris. This is probably more correct, as they are
locally held to be a branch of the caste. But their customs differ in some points from
those of the other Gowaris. They will admit outsiders from any respectable caste and
worship the Gond gods, [115] and there seems no harm, therefore, in allowing the
separate article on them to remain.”
74. In the above passage it has been categorically stated that "Gond Gowari" has been treated as a
distinct caste and in the Census they have been amalgamated with Gowari. The account given by
Russell does not lead to any conclusion that "Gond Gowari"
were extinct before 1911.
75. It is also relevant to note that it was after the report of Backward Classes Commission (1955),
where recommendation was made to include Gowari as sub-Tribe of Gond for the State of Madhya
Pradesh, consequently by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1956 in
State of Madhya Pradesh "Gond Gowari" was added in Entry 12 and after re-organisation of the
State, in Districts which came into State of Bombay, "Gond Gowari" was added by Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes Lists (Modification) Order, 1956 dated 29.10.1956 "Gond Gowari" was added.
There have been conscious addition by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders
(Amendment) Act, 1956 and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Lists (Modification) Order,
1956 as "Gond Gowari" it cannot be accepted that the Parliament included Tribe which had become
extinct before 1911.
76. The High Court in paragraph 68 of the judgment has itself referred to Report of Research
Officers dated 12.05.2006. On the basis of the decision taken in respect Gowari community under
the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Chief Minister on 29.05.2005 Tribal Development Department was
entrusted to ascertain the facts. The Research Officers on 12.05.2006 personally visited the areas in
which maximum population of Gowari caste and "Gond Gowari" caste were found in different
villages of District Gadchiroli. It shall be useful to refer to the paragraph 68 of the judgment of the
High Court which is to the following effect:
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
32

“68. After going through the report dated 12-5-2006 (wrongly mentioned as '18-
5-2006'), we find that the Research Officers visited the areas. The Committee of the
Research Officers conducted search of revenue and school records of certain
claimants. It is the finding of the said Committee that upon inspection of P-I Register
prior to 1950 in the Taluka Office of Land Records at Kurkheda, no evidence is found
of the entry "Gond Gowari", but the evidence is of the entries of Gowari or Gowara.
The Committee also inspected the school records of the period prior to 1950 from the
Zilla Parishad Primary School, which included the school admission register and the
affidavits. It found one entry of Gowari (Gond) made on 1-7-1955 and rest of the
entries are of Gowara or Gowari, which are also found in the Zilla Parishad Primary
Schools at Ramgad, Yenglekheda, Saletola.
The Research Officers further record the finding that upon oral interviews of the villagers, it is found
that "Gond Gowari"
tribe is a sub-tribe of Gond and their cultural traits and customs are found similar to
those of Gond tribe. It further states that when the information about Gowari tribe is
collected, it was found to be an independent tribe, having no similarity in cultural
traits and customs with Gonds or "Gond Gowari"s. The Committee has tried to lay
down the six tests to make out a distinction between Gowaris and "Gond Gowari"s.”
77. The High Court in the above paragraph itself has noticed that the Research Officers conducted
research and has also found Entry of "Gond Gowari" made on 01.07.1955. Thus, the Research
Officers before 29.10.1956 found "Gond Gowari" hence the above evidence which was relied by the
High Court itself proved that "Gond Gowari" Tribe was in existence and found personally by the
Research Officers. Although in paragraph 68 the above facts were noticed by the High Court but in
paragraph 74 in the heading:
ADJUDICATION BY US in sub-para (3) the High Court states:
“74(3) There is no reason to discard the report of the Research Officers submitted on
12/18-5-2006. The Research Officers personally visited the core area of residence of
Gond Gowaris, inspected the old record of Zilla Parishad Schools and the Land
Revenue Department, conducted oral interviews of the villagers, but did not find any
Entry as Gond Gowari or any person of this tribe. The Research Officers record the
finding that Gowari tribe has no affinity with Gonds. ” (emphasis by us)
78. The conclusion of the High Court that Research Officers did not find any Entry as
"Gond Gowari" is factually incorrect and contrary to what was found in paragraph 68
as noted above.
79. We have already noted above the Government Resolution dated 24.4.1985 issued
by the Tribal Development Department of the State, the difference between “Gond”
and "Gond Gowari", the difference in the character and customs of Scheduled Tribe
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
33

community of "Gond Gowari" and community of Gowari as extracted above. The
Government Resolution was issued after study by the State Government, the High
Court although has noticed above Resolution in paragraph 70 of the judgment but
has given no reason as to why differentiation in two Tribes is to be discarded.
80. There is one more reason due to which the conclusion of the High Court that
Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" was extinct before 1911 has to be flawed. The reason
is that in Writ Petition No.4779 of 2008 filed by Advasis "Gond Gowari" a prayer was
made to quash the Scheduled Tribe certificates to "Gond Gowari" granted to
respondent Nos. 4 to 19. The High Court by passing order has called for certificates of
"Gond Gowari" which are dealt with by the High Court in paragraph 77 to 83. In
paragraph 77 following is the discussion by the High Court:
“77. .......The record shows that 22 claimants produced the extracts of P-I Register
maintained by the Taluka Land Records Departments showing the caste of their
forefathers as "Gond Gowari" prior to 1950. Except this, none other claimants out of
136, produced any record of the period prior to the year 1950, evidencing their
caste/tribe as "Gond Gowari", but the documents produced by them indicate their
caste/tribe as Gond, Gowara or Gowari. If the documents produced by all such 136
claimants prior to 1950 and subsequent to 1950 are taken into consideration, the
same indicate that 39 claimants produced the documents indicating their tribe as
"Gond Gowari";
53 claimants produced the documents indicating their tribe as Gowari; 29 claimants
produced the documents showing their tribe as Gowara; and 9 claimants produced
the documents showing their tribe as Gond. This position is also admitted and
demonstrated in the reply filed by the Committee. ”
81. The High Court further in paragraph 83 after perusing the records of the
Committee found 39 claimants produced the documents which are in the nature of
entries in P-I revenue record pertaining to the period 1922-1923. When before the
High Court Scheduled Tribe certificates of "Gond Gowari" were filed in large number
and there were documents to support by the revenue entries some of which are prior
to 1950 and which certificates were sought to be quashed in the writ petition, the
existence of Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" was very much found.
The Caste Scrutiny Committee having validated the said certificates it was not open for the High
Court to say that Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" became extinct prior to 1911. The host of the
evidence which was before the High Court including the Research Officers' Report dated 12.05.2006
and Scheduled Tribe certificates of the candidates who were “Gond Gowari” it was not open for the
High Court to come to the conclusion that Scheduled Tribe "Gond Gowari" was extinct prior to 1911.
The High Court summoned all the certificates and there was no finding that certificates were fake or
persons who were given certificates are non-existent. The High Court erred in coming to the
conclusion that "Gond Gowari" Tribe was extinct prior to 1911. We, thus, conclude that even on the
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
34

basis of materials which were brought before the High Court no conclusion could have been drawn
that "Gond Gowari" Tribe was extinct prior to 1911.
82. We, thus, answer Question Nos.3 and 4 in the following manner:
ANSWER NO.3 The High Court could not have entered into the issue that "Gond
Gowari" which was Scheduled Tribe mentioned in Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
Order, 1950 as amended upto 1976 is no more in existence and became extinct before
1911.
ANSWER NO.4 The conclusion of the High Court in the impugned judgment that
"Gond Gowari" Tribe had been extinct before 1911 is not supported by the materials
which were on record before the High Court.
Both the questions being interconnected are taken together.
83. The caste ‘Gowari’ and ‘Gond Gowari’ are two distinct and separate castes. We have extracted
the description of ‘Gowari’ and ‘Gond Gowari’ given by Russell and Hiralal in the celebrated book,
‘The Tribes and Castes of Central Provinces of India’. Russel and Hiralal have separately dealt with
‘Gowari’ and ‘Gond Gowari’ and have categorically stated that ‘Gond Gowari’ have been treated as
distinct castes from ‘Gowari’. We may also refer to the book published by Anthropological Survey of
India, People of India, National Series Volume III on “The Scheduled Tribes’, where ‘Gond Gowari’
have been described in following words: -
“GOND, GOWARI They are a community of cattle herders who have been referred to
by Russell and Hiralal (1916) as the Gond- Gowari and described as a small hybrid
caste formed by an alliance between the Gonds and Gowaris. They have been enlisted
as Gowari, a subgroup of the Gond in the Government of India list for scheduled
tribes. Our findings, however, reveal that they are a discrete community and not a
subgroup of any other tribe. They are distributed in the Bhandara, Amravati and
Garhchiroli districts of Maharashtra and in the Balaghat and Sioni districts of
Madhya Pradesh. Marathi is spoken for both inter-and intra-group communication.
The Devanagari script is used. The Gowari are short and medium- statured people
with a dark complexion. The main diet is rice, jowar and wheat, local pulses and
seasonal vegetables. They are non-vegetarians but do not eat beef.”
84. The ‘Gowari’ which is another backward community have not been included in the list of
Scheduled Tribes in the above book.
85. We have already referred to the Enquiry Report by the Tribal Development Department dated
12.05.2006. The Enquiry Report states following: -
“With connection of knowing the culture, customs and traditions of Gowari caste and
Gowari Tribe, visits were made to aforesaid villages and during these visits village
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
35

information sheets were given to villagers to be filled by them; also discussions made
with them and their statements were recorded. Also information was gathered from
the rest of the villagers who did not belong to either of these two communities about
their knowledge of these two communities. From this information it has transpired
that Gond Gowari tribe is a sub-tribe of Gond Tribe and that there is traditional
intermixing of food and marital ties (roti-beti relationship) between these
communities and there are common cultural customs and traditions between them.
However, having collected the information about Gowari Caste it has transpired that
it has a separate existence and its culture, customs and traditions do not match with
culture customs and traditions of Gond or Gond Gowari Tribe which are totally
different.”
86. We have further noticed the Census of 1891 and 1901 which have been referred by the High
Court. The population of ‘Gowari’ has been shown separately from the population of ‘Gond Gowari’.
We have also noticed the ratio of the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Basavalingappa
and Bhaiya lal as well as Milind. The High Court could not have undertaken the enquiry to declare
the caste which is not included in the Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950 as a Scheduled Tribe. The High
Court could not have granted a declaration that the caste ‘Gowari’ is ‘Gond Gowari’ which is referred
to in Item 28 of Entry 18 of Constitutional Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950 amended as on date.
87. The High Court’s view that ‘Gond Gowari’ is not a sub-tribe of ‘Gond’, hence, its validity cannot
be tested on the basis of the affinity test specified in the Government Order dated 24.04.1985 is also
not correct. The report of the first Backward Commission (1955) by which recommendation was
made to add ‘Gowari’ as a sub-tribe of ‘Gond’ was on the basis of study and research by the
Backward Commission which cannot be brushed aside.
88. We have also noticed the authoritative books on Tribes in Central India that ‘Gond Gowari’ is a
sub- tribe of ‘Gond’. In the Government Resolution dated 29.04.1985 comparative chart was
annexed where general information regarding Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes i.e.
‘Gond Gowari’ and ‘Gowari’ have been given. The Government Resolution also mentioned that
‘Gond Gowari’ is also a small sub- tribe of ‘Gond’ tribe.
89. Shri Rohtagi submits that it has been held by this Court that with regard to entries of Scheduled
Tribes in Entry 18, all entries be treated to be separate caste and it is not necessary to prove any
affinity with ‘Gond’. He submits that in the Entry 18, the word “including” was deleted by Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribes Order Amendment Act, 1976, the effect of which was that all entries of
caste in Entry 18 became independent to ‘Gond’ and no affinity is to be proved by any community
from ‘Gond’. He submits that ‘Gowari’ to claim the benefit of the Scheduled Tribe need not prove
any affinity with ‘Gond’. He submits that the High Court has rightly undertaked the exercise to
ignore a non-existent tribe and to extend the benefit of the Scheduled Tribe. Shri Rohtagi has placed
reliance on judgment of this Court in State of Maharashtra versus Mana Adim Jamat Mandal
,(2006)4 SCC 98. In the above case, two questions were raised which have been noticed in the
paragraph 1 of the judgment which is to the following effect: -
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
36

“1. What appears to be a perpetual controversy with regard to the Scheduled Tribe
status has again engaged the attention of this Court for a considerable time. Two
questions are raised before us:
1.Whether the “Mana” community in the State of Maharashtra is a sub-tribe of
“Gond” and is a Scheduled Tribe or not?
2.Whether a two-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Dina v. Narayan Singh (for
the sake of brevity “Dina I”) and the decision rendered by another two-Judge Bench
of this Court in Dadaji v. Sukhdeobabu (for the sake of brevity “Dina II”) are
overruled by a Constitution bench of this Court in State of Maharashtra v. Milind?”
90. The caste ‘Mana’ was also one of the castes which was included in the Entry 18. By the
Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985, it was directed that ‘Mana’ community be not treated as
Scheduled Tribe unless they establish relationship or affinity with ‘Gond’ which Government
Resolution was also under challenge in the above case.
91. This Court in the above judgment noticed the deletion of word “including” in Entry 18 and came
to the conclusion that Mana is not a sub-tribe of ‘Gond’. Following was laid down in paragraph 30: -
“30. The common pattern found in most of the group entries is that there is a
punctuation mark comma (,) between one entry and another entry in the group
signifying that each one of them is deemed to be a separate Scheduled Tribe by itself.
In the present case, Entry o18 of the Schedule clearly signifies that each of the tribes
mentioned therein is deemed to be a separate tribe by itself and not a sub-tribe of
“Gond”. “Gond” is a Schedule Tribe, it is not disputed. As already noticed that “Gond”
including Arakh or Arrakh, etc. found in Entry 12 of the Amendment Act 63 of 1956
has been done away with by the Amendment Act of 1976. In Entry 18 of the Second
Schedule of the Amendment Act of 1976 the word “including” was deliberately
omitted, which signifies that each one of the tribes specified in Entry 18 is deemed to
be a separate tribe by itself.
Therefore, “Mana” is not a sub-tribe of “Gond” but a separate tribe by itself and is a Schedule Tribe.”
92. What was laid down by this Court with regard to ‘Mana’ which was also a tribe included in Entry
18 is not applicable with regard to Entry ‘Gond Gowari’. With the ‘Gowari’ word ‘Gond’ is prefixed.
The expression ‘Gond Gowari’ clearly expresses that the community ‘Gond Gowari’ has to do with
tribe ‘Gond’ The community ‘Mana’ has no such indication and insofar as ‘Gond Gowari’ is
concerned we are clear in our view that ‘Gond Gowari’ is a community which has affinity with ‘Gond’
and is sub-tribe of ‘Gond’. The entry of ‘Gond Gowari’ in Scheduled Tribes Order 1950 was as a
sub-tribe of ‘Gond’ which is clear from a report of the Backward Classes Commission, 1955. When
the inclusion of the entry ‘Gond Gowari’ was as (sub- tribe of Gond), its affinity with ‘Gond’ cannot
be ignored on any basis.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
37

93. The judgment of this Court in State of Maharashtra versus Mana Adim Jamat Mandal(Supra),
cannot be read as an authority to hold that ‘Gond Gowari’ has no affinity with ‘Gond’. The judgment
of this Court in State of Maharashtra versus Mana Adim Jamat Mandal (supra) is solely based on
deletion of word “including” in Entry 18. For the purpose of this case, we need not delve any further
as to what is the intendment of Parliament in deleting the word “including” and by deletion of word
“including”, all tribes included in common group i.e. Entry 18 shall be treated separate and has
nothing to do with ‘Gond’.
94. We entertain our own doubts about the correctness of the ratio of judgment in the State of
Maharashtra versus Mana Adim Jamat Mandal with regard to a group entry. As per Article 342(1),
tribes or tribal communities or parts or groups within tribes or tribal communities shall for the
purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes. There has to be some purposes for
joining number of tribes together in one entry, but as observed above in case with regard to ‘Gond
Gowari’ the affinity is more than apparent with ‘Gond’ and the judgment of this Court in State of
Maharashtra versus Mana Adim Jamat Mandal (Supra) cannot be read as an authority to hold that
‘Gond Gowari’ is not a sub-tribe of ‘Gond’ and no affinity is required to be established with Gond by
the tribe ‘Gond Gowari’. We thus do not find any infirmity in Government Resolution dated
24.04.2984 insofar as Scheduled Tribe ‘Gond Gowari’ is concerned.
95. In view of the foregoing discussion we answer question No.5 and 6 in following manner: -
ANSWER NO.5 The caste ‘Gowari’ is not the same as ‘Gond Gowari’. The High Court
could not have granted declaration of caste ‘Gowari’ as ‘Gond Gowari’.
ANSWER NO.6 The High Court is not correct in its view that ‘Gond Gowari’ shown as
item No.28 in Entry 18 of Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950, is not a sub-tribe of ‘Gond’.
The validity of caste certificate to ‘Gond Gowari’ has to be tested on the basis of
affinity test as specified in the Government Resolution dated 24.04.1985.
96. In view of the foregoing discussion, none of the reasons given by the High Court in paragraph 74
of the judgment are sustainable to hold that ‘Gowari’ are entitled to Scheduled Tribes Certificate of
‘Gond Gowari’. The entire basis of the judgment of the High Court that tribe ‘Gond Gowari’ was
completely extinct before 1911 having been found to be flawed, the entire basis of judgment is
knocked out.
97. Much emphasis has been given by the learned counsel for the respondents that the State
Government having recommended in 1967 and 1979 to include ‘Gowari’ in the list of Scheduled
Tribes, it could not have changed its view subsequently. One of the reasons given by the High Court
in paragraph 74(2) is as follows: -
“74(2). We accept the view taken by the Central and the State Government that - (a)
Gowari community is included in the Scheduled Tribes Order of the State as ‘Gond
Gowari’ and it is wrongly projected as a sub-tribe of Gond, (b) Gowari is an
independent tribe and not a sub-tribe of Gond, and (c) it is the Gowari community
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
38

which will have to be issued the certificate as Gond Gowari.”
98. When the State has expressly after 1979 has written to the Government of India on 06.11.1981
that ‘Gowari’ community does not fulfill the criteria of Scheduled Tribe and thereafter after 1984,
several studies were conducted by Tribal department in State of Maharashtra including report dated
12.05.2006 which reaffirms that ‘Gond Gowari’ and ‘Gowari’ are distinct community and ‘Gowari’ is
not Scheduled Tribe, there was no error in taking stand before the High Court in the writ petition
that ‘Gowari’ are not entitled for Scheduled Tribe Certificate. We fail to understand as to how the
High Court has observed that it accepts the view of the Central and State Government that ‘Gowari’
community be included in the Scheduled Tribe Order.
99. Learned Counsel for the petitioner has also relied on the report dated 29.10.2020 submitted by
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai on “Socio Anthropological study of ‘Gowari’ community of
Maharashtra” in which report, the conclusion has been recorded that there are major differences
between ‘Gond Gowari’ and ‘Gowari’. It is relevant to notice that the High Court has noticed the
decision of the State Government to entrust the study to Tata Institute of Social Sciences which facts
have been noticed in paragraph 86 of the judgment. Although the report dated 29.10.2020 which
has been brought on the record do reaffirms the stand taken by the State that both the communities
are distinct and different and ‘Gowari’ are not Scheduled Tribe but we need not base our judgment
on such report benefit of which report was not available to the High Court while deciding the writ
petition.
100. Now, we come to the last submission of Shri Rohtagi. Shri Rohtagi submits that Scheduled
Tribe Certificate to the members of ‘Gowari’ community was granted after the judgment of the High
Court dated 14.08.2018, on the basis of which certificates large number of students have taken
admission in different educational institutions taking benefit of Scheduled Tribes as well as
employment at various places as Scheduled Tribes candidates which need to be protected by this
Court. After the declaration granted by the High Court, the authorities proceeded to grant Scheduled
Tribe certificate to the ‘Gowari’ community and it is true that on strength of such Scheduled Tribe
certificate, several students must have taken admission in different courses as Scheduled Tribe
candidate and persons have also secured employment as Scheduled Tribe candidate. The State of
Maharashtra has belatedly filed these appeals which delay in filing these appeals have already been
condoned by us and there being no interim orders in these appeals staying the effect of judgment of
the High Court, grant of Scheduled Tribe certificate was natural consequence of the judgment of
High Court.
101. We in the ends of justice directs that the admission taken and employment secured by the
members of ‘Gowari’ community on the basis of Scheduled Tribe certificate granted to them
between 14.08.2018 till date shall not be affected by this judgment and they shall be allowed to
retain the benefit of Scheduled Tribe obtained by them. However, the above Scheduled Tribe
candidates shall not be entitled to any further benefit as Scheduled Tribe except their initial
admission in different courses or employment at different places on the strength of Scheduled Tribe
certificate given to the ‘Gowari’ Community obtained between 14.08.2018 and this day.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
39

102. In view of the foregoing discussions, we are of the view that the High Court erred in declaring
‘Gowari’ as ‘Gond Gowari’ a Scheduled Tribes referred to in item 28 in Entry 18.
103. In result, we allow the appeals, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court dated
14.08.2018 and dismiss the writ petitions. Parties shall bear their own costs.
......................J. ( ASHOK BHUSHAN ) ......................J. ( R. SUBHASH REDDY ) ......................J. (
M.R. SHAH ) New Delhi, December 18, 2020.
The State Of Maharashtra vs Keshao Vishwanath Sonone on 18 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114109184/
40
