The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 472, 2020 (2) SCC 577,
(2020) 1 CRIMES 210, (2020) 1 RECCRIR 748, (2020) 2 SCALE 190, AIRONLINE
2020 SC 38
Author: Ajay Rastogi
Bench: Ajay Rastogi, Indu Malhotra
                                                                  NON−REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 123 OF 2020
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO(S). 11369 OF 2019)
          STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                 ….APPELLANT(S)
                                   VERSUS
          BABBU RATHORE & ANR.                                    ….RESPONDENT(S)
                                             JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal is directed against the judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 9th May,
2019 confirming Order of the trial Judge dated 24th July, 2015 whereby the respondents have been
discharged from the offences under Sections 302/34, 404/34 16:20:23 IST Reason:
of the IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989(hereinafter being referred to as “Act,
1989”) at the advanced stage of the trial when almost all the material witnesses have
been examined by the prosecution which has given rise to this appeal.
3. The background facts in nutshell are that deceased Baisakhu, in a drunken state met Kamla
Prajapati on road to ward no. 10, Pasia, Thana Anuppur, Anuppur, Madhya Pradesh. Kamla
Prajapati took him to his house, but the deceased Baisakhu stated that he had to return two hundred
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/65389692/
1

fifty rupees to Nasru and requested him to take to his place. Upon insistence of deceased Baisakhu,
Kamla Prajapati took him to the house of Nasru where accused Babbu Rathore was drinking liquor.
Baisakhu stated that he wanted to have liquor so leaving him there, Kamla Prajapati returned back.
When Ujaria Bai, the wife of deceased, went to house of Nasru to inquire about her husband, then
Nasru told her that deceased Baisakhu had left with Babbu Rathore. The dead body of Baisakhu was
recovered on 14 th July, 2011. Information of unnatural death was recorded by police and post−
mortem on the body of the deceased was conducted which proved death was unnatural and caused
by asphyxia due to strangulation.
4. The preliminary investigation confirmed that the deceased was last seen with the present
respondents. After registration of FIR, investigation was conducted by the Sub−Inspector and
charge−sheet came to be filed against the present respondents for offences punishable under Section
302/34, 404/34 of the IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, 1989. The trial Court took cognizance of
the matter and Special Case No. 37/11 was registered.
5. During proceedings in Special Case No. 37/11, statement of the material witnesses PW 2 Narsu,
PW 4 Kamla Prajapati and PW 5 Uparia Bai, wife of deceased Baisakhu were recorded. It appears
from the record that at the advanced stage of the trial, a grievance was raised by the respondents
that they had been charged under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, 1989 and since the investigation has
been conducted by an Officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police which is the
mandate of law as provided under Section 9 of the Act, 1989 read with Rule 7 of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes(Prevention of Atrocities) Rules, 1995(hereinafter being referred to as the
“Rules, 1995”), the very investigation is faulty and illegal and that deserves to be quashed and set
aside and in consequence thereof, further proceedings in trial does not hold good and respondents
deserve to be discharged.
6. Learned trial Court, while taking note of Section 9 of the Act, 1989 and Rule 7 of the Rules, 1995
held that the investigation has been conducted by an Officer below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police and is without authority and illegal and in consequence thereof, discharged
the respondents not from the charges levelled against them under the provisions of the Act, 1989 but
also from the provisions of the IPC for which there was no requirement of the investigation to be
conducted by an Officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police under judgment
dated 24th July, 2015 which came to be challenged before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and
dismissed by a cryptic order dated 9 th May, 2019.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the respondents were charged for offences
punishable under Section 302/34, 404/34 of the IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, 1989 and in the
given circumstances, the High Court has committed an apparent error in quashing the proceedings
in discharging the respondents on a hyper technical ground that the investigation has been
conducted by an Officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police and discharging the
respondents in the given circumstances is not sustainable in law and that too when the trial is at the
advanced stage and all the material prosecution witnesses have been examined and the judgment of
the High Court needs to be interfered by this Court.
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/65389692/
2

8. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents, while supporting the order of the High Court,
confirming judgment of the trial Court dated 24th July, 2015 submits that if the very investigation
was found to be faulty and not in compliance with the mandate of Section 9 of Act, 1989 read with
Rule 7 of the Rules, 1995, the structure built up by the appellant could not sustain on the weak
foundation, and this fact has not been disputed by the appellant that investigation was conducted by
an Officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police which is the mandatory requirement
under Rule 7 of the Rules, 1995, and in the given circumstances, no error has been committed by the
learned Special Judge in discharging the respondents and confirmed by the High Court vide its
order impugned dated 9th May, 2019.
9. For appreciating the rival submissions, we need to refer Section 9 of the Act, 1989 and Rule 7 of
the Rules, 1995 which are as under:− “9. Conferment of powers.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code or in any other provision of this Act, the State Government may, if it considers
it necessary or expedient so to do,—
(a) for the prevention of and for coping with any offence under this Act, or
(b) for any case or class of group of cases under this Act, in any district or part thereof, confer, by
notification in the Official Gazette, on any officer of the State Government the powers exercisable by
a police officer under the Code in such district or part thereof or, as the case may be, for such case or
class or group of cases, and in particular, the powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution of
persons before any Special Court.
(2) All officers of police and all other officers of Government shall assist the officer referred to in
sub− section (1) in the execution of the provisions of this Act or any rule, scheme or order made
thereunder. (3) The provisions of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply to the exercise of the
powers by an officer under sub−section (1).” “Rule 7. Investigating officer—(1) An offence committed
under the Act shall be investigated by a police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent
of Police. The investigating officer shall be appointed by the State Government/Director General of
Police/Superintendent of Police after taking into account his past experience, sense of ability and
justice to perceive the implications of the case and investigate it along with right lines within the
shortest possible time.
(2) The investigating officer so appointed under sub− rule (1) shall complete the investigation on top
priority within thirty days and submit the report to the Superintendent of Police who in turn will
immediately forward the report to the Director General of Police of the State Government.
(3) The Home Secretary and the Social Welfare Secretary to the State Government, Director of
Prosecution, the officer in charge of prosecution and the Director General of Police shall review by
the end of every quarter the position of all investigations done by the investigating officer.”
10. By virtue of its enabling power, it is the duty and responsibility of the State Government to issue
notification conferring power of investigation of cases by notified police officer not below the rank of
Deputy Superintendent of Police. Rule 7 of the Rules 1995 provides rank of investigation officer to
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/65389692/
3

be not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police. An officer below that rank cannot act as
investigating officer in holding investigation in reference to the offences committed under any
provisions of the Act, 1989 but the question arose for consideration is that apart from the offences
committed under the Act 1989, if the offence complained are both under the IPC and the offence
enumerated in Section 3 of the Act, 1989 and the investigation being made by a competent police
officer in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure(hereinafter being
referred to as the “Code”), the offences under IPC can be quashed and set aside for non−
investigation of the offence under Section 3 of the Act, 1989 by a competent police officer. This
question has been examined by a two−Judge Bench of this Court in State of M.P. Vs. Chunnilal @
Chunni Singh 2009(12) SCC 649. Relevant para is as under:− “ By virtue of its enabling power it is
the duty and responsibility of the State Government to issue a notification conferring power of
investigation of cases by notified police officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police for different areas in the police districts. Rule 7 of the Rules provided rank of investigating
officer to be not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police. An officer below that rank
cannot act as investigating officer.
The provisions in Section 9 of the Act, Rule 7 of the Rules and Section 4 of the Code when jointly
read lead to an irresistible conclusion that the investigation of an offence under Section 3 of the Act
by an officer not appointed in terms of Rule 7 is illegal and invalid. But when the offence complained
are both under IPC and any of the offence enumerated in Section 3 of the Act the investigation
which is being made by a competent police officer in accordance with the provisions of the Code
cannot be quashed for non−investigation of the offence under Section 3 of the Act by a competent
police officer. In such a situation the proceedings shall proceed in an appropriate court for the
offences punishable under IPC notwithstanding investigation and the charge−sheet being not liable
to be accepted only in respect of offence under Section 3 of the Act for taking cognizance of that
offence.” (emphasis supplied)
11. Undisputedly, in the instant case, the respondents were charged under Sections 302/34, 404/34
IPC apart from Section 3(2)(v) of the Act, 1989 and the charges under IPC have been framed after
investigation by a competent police officer under the Code, in such a situation, in our view, the High
Court has committed an apparent error in quashing the proceedings and discharging the
respondents from the offences committed under the provisions of IPC where the investigation has
been made by a competent police officer under the provisions of the Code. In such a situation, the
charge−sheet deserves to proceed in an appropriate competent Court of jurisdiction for the offence
punishable under the IPC, notwithstanding the fact that the charge−sheet could not have proceeded
confined to the offence under Section 3 of the Act, 1989.
12. The order impugned is accordingly restricted to the offence under Section 3 of the Act, 1989 and
not in respect of offences punishable under the IPC. The Special Case No. 37/11 is restored on the
file of the Special Court, District Anuppur(MP) and the trial Court may proceed further and
conclude the trial expeditiously in respect of offences punishable under the IPC in accordance with
law.
13. The appeal is partly allowed in terms as indicated above.
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/65389692/
4

14. Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………………………….J. (INDU MALHOTRA) ……………………………J. (AJAY RASTOGI) NEW DELHI
January 17, 2020
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Babbu Rathore on 17 January, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/65389692/
5
