The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bherulal on 15 October, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 833
Author: Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench: Dinesh Maheshwari, Sanjay Kishan Kaul
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) DIARY NO.9217 OF 2020
                         THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                             
                                        VERSUS
                         BHERULAL                                                       
                                                               J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
IA No.62372/2020-CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING
1. The Special Leave Petition has been filed with a delay of 663 days! The explanation given in the
application for condonation of delay is set out in paragraphs 3 and 4.
2. We are constrained to pen down a detailed order as it appears that all our counseling to
Government and Date: 2020.10.16 Government authorities have fallen on deaf ears i.e., the
Supreme Court of India cannot be a place for the Governments to walk in when they choose ignoring
the period of limitation prescribed. We have raised the issue that if the Government machinery is so
inefficient and incapable of filing appeals/petitions in time, the solution may lie in requesting the
Legislature to expand the time period for filing limitation for Government authorities because of
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bherulal on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167417106/
1

their gross incompetence. That is not so. Till the Statute subsists, the appeals/petitions have to be
filed as per the Statues prescribed.
3. No doubt, some leeway is given for the Government inefficiencies but the sad part is that the
authorities keep on relying on judicial pronouncements for a period of time when technology had
not advanced and a greater leeway was given to the Government (Collector, Land Acquisition,
Anantnag & Anr vs. Mst. Katiji & Ors. (1987) 2 SCC 107). This position is more than elucidated by
the judgment of this Court in Office of the Chief Post Master General & Ors. v. Living Media India
Ltd. & Anr. (2012) 3 SCC 563 where the Court observed as under:
“12) It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were well aware or conversant
with the issues involved including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in this Court. They cannot claim
that they have a separate period of limitation when the Department was possessed
with competent persons familiar with court proceedings. In the absence of plausible
and acceptable explanation, we are posing a question why the delay is to be condoned
mechanically merely because the Government or a wing of the Government is a party
before us.
Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter of condonation of delay when
there was no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bonafide, a liberal
concession has to be adopted to advance substantial justice, we are of the view that in
the facts and circumstances, the Department cannot take advantage of various earlier
decisions. The claim on account of impersonal machinery and inherited bureaucratic
methodology of making several notes cannot be accepted in view of the modern
technologies being used and available. The law of limitation undoubtedly binds
everybody including the Government.
13) In our view, it is the right time to inform all the government bodies, their agencies
and instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable and acceptable explanation
for the delay and there was bonafide effort, there is no need to accept the usual
explanation that the file was kept pending for several months/years due to
considerable degree of procedural red-
tape in the process. The government departments are under a special obligation to ensure that they
perform their duties with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an exception and
should not be used as an anticipated benefit for government departments. The law shelters everyone
under the same light and should not be swirled for the benefit of a few. Considering the fact that
there was no proper explanation offered by the Department for the delay except mentioning of
various dates, according to us, the Department has miserably failed to give any acceptable and
cogent reasons sufficient to condone such a huge delay.” Eight years hence the judgment is still
unheeded!
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bherulal on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167417106/
2

4. A reading of the aforesaid application shows that the reason for such an inordinate delay is stated
to be only “due to unavailability of the documents and the process of arranging the documents”. In
paragraph 4 a reference has been made to “bureaucratic process works, it is inadvertent that delay
occurs”.
5. A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that if there is some merit in the case, the
period of delay is to be given a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed in any case. It is
really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases. This does not, of course, take away the
jurisdiction of the Court in an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being adopted in what we have categorized
earlier as “certificate cases”. The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of dismissal from the
Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue and thus, say that nothing could be done because the
highest Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality and save the skin of officers
who may be at default that such a process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no improvement. The purpose of coming
to this Court is not to obtain such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time when
the concerned officer responsible for the same bears the consequences. The irony is that in none of
the cases any action is taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It is presumed
that this Court will condone the delay and even in making submissions, straight away counsels
appear to address on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as happened in this
case till we pointed out to the counsel that he must first address us on the question of limitation.
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to do in all matters today, where there
are such inordinate delays that the Government or State authorities coming before us must pay for
wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such costs can be recovered from the officers
responsible.
8. Looking to the period of delay and the casual manner in which the application has been worded,
we consider appropriate to impose costs on the petitioner- State of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty five
thousand) to be deposited with the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee. The amount be
deposited in four weeks. The amount be recovered from the officers responsible for the delay in
filing the special leave petition and a certificate of recovery of the said amount be also filed in this
Court within the said period of time.
9. The special leave petition is dismissed as time barred in terms aforesaid.
10. We make it clear that if the aforesaid order is not complied within time, we will be constrained to
initiate contempt proceedings against the Chief Secretary.
11. A copy of the order be placed before the Chief Secretary, State of Madhya Pradesh.
....................J. [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL] ....................J. [DINESH MAHESHWARI] New Delhi;
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bherulal on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167417106/
3

October 15, 2020.
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Bherulal on 15 October, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167417106/
4
