U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8
June, 2020
Author: R. F. Nariman
Bench: B.R. Gavai, Navin Sinha, Rohinton Fali Nariman
                                                                              ‘REPORTABL
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020
                                   (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 25793 of 2017)
                      U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
                      CORPORATION                                      Appellant
                                                       VERSUS
                      RAJENDERI DEVI & ORS.                            Respondents
                                                   JUDGMENT
R. F. NARIMAN, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. In the present case, death occurred to a 45 year old who was on a cycle and hit by a bus on
16.08.2001. The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as ‘MACT’) found that it
was as a result of rash and negligent driving by the driver of the bus, which was hired by the
appellant-Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation under an agreement between it and the
bus owner. Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 Ultimately finding that the income would be
Rs.18,000/- per year, minus one-third, and with a multiplier of 13, Rs.1.65 lakhs + 8
per cent interest was awarded by the MACT, but it was held, following Rajasthan
State Road Transport Corporation v. Kailash Nath Kothari (1997) 7 SCC 481 [“Kailash
Nath Kothari”], that it is only for the appellant-Corporation to pay this entire amount
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
1

and not the insurance company. This was held as follows:
“15. The bus is a private one. It ran under the control of the UPSRTC. The ld. counsel
for the Insurance Company has argued that the bus under the control of UPSRTC
devolved the responsibility of payment of any compensation upon UPSRTC because it
is not the owner who is in control of the bus but the Corporation who controls the
working of the driver. The ld. counsel for the company cites Rajasthan State Road
Transport Corporation versus Kailash Nath Kothari 1997 ACT 1148. I find the case
law referred to applies squarely to the present case at hand. The UPSRTC O.P. No. 3,
and not the O.P. No. 1 and 2, is responsible to pay the award.”
3. In the High Court, by a judgment dated 27.09.2016, the same judgment of Kailash Nath Kothari
(supra) was referred to and followed, making it clear, therefore, that the appellant alone is
vicariously liable to pay the victim’s family the amount of compensation that has been ordered. It
was therefore also stated, referring to the agreement between the Corporation and the owner of the
vehicle, as follows:
“Much emphasis has been laid by learned counsel for the appellant on Clause 10 of
the agreement between the CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 appellant and the
owner to wriggle out of its responsibility to make payment of compensation. There is
no reference of the said agreement in the impugned award. No such ground has been
taken in the memo of appeal that it was filed before the Tribunal but has not been
considered. In any view of the matter, even if such a clause exists in the agreement, it
is between the appellant and the owner and shall not affect the rights of the claimants
to receive compensation flowing from the provisions of the Act. Thus, the first
argument advanced by learned counsel for the appellant is devoid of any force and
not liable to be accepted.”
4. Having heard learned counsel appearing for all the parties, we are of the view that the judgment
relied upon, viz., Kailash Nath Kothari (supra), is itself distinguishable for the reason that the
judgment itself records as follows:
“3. . . . The insurance company took the plea, in its reply to the claim petitions, that
the bus at the time of the accident was under the control of the RSRTC, therefore, it
was the liability of the RSRTC to pay compensation and the insurance company was
not liable. It was further pleaded by the insurance company that the liability of the
insurance company, in any event, was limited and its liability could not exceed
Rs.75000/- in respect of all the claim petitions arising out of one accident. . . .
4. . . . Issue No. 2 was also decided in favour of the claim petitioners but it was held
that in the light of the terms of the policy of insurance and relevant provisions of the
Act, the liability of the insurance company was limited, in respect of the accident, to a
total amount of Rs.75,000/-
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
2

only.” xxx xxx xxx CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 “7. . . . Learned counsel appearing for the
insurance company, did not question the finding on Issue No. 2 and submitted that the specified
amount had since been paid by the insurance company. . . .” In addition to this, the Court also held,
relying upon the definition of “owner” in Section 2(19) of the Motor Vehicles Act (as it then stood),
as follows:
“17. The definition of owner under Section 2(19) of the Act is not exhaustive. It has,
therefore, to be construed, in a wider sense, in the facts and circumstances of a given
case. The expression owner must include, in a given case, the person who has the
actual possession and control of the vehicle and under whose directions and
commands the driver is obliged to operate the bus. To confine the meaning of
“owner” to the registered owner only would in a case where the vehicle is in the actual
possession and control of the hirer not be proper for the purpose of fastening of
liability in case of an accident. The liability of the “owner” is vicarious for the tort
committed by its employee during the course of his employment and it would be a
question of fact in each case as to on whom can vicarious liability be fastened in the
case of an accident. . . .” (emphasis in original) In this view of the matter, it was
therefore held that since the insurance company’s liability was limited only to
Rs.75,000/- which had been paid, the insurance company would, on the facts of that
case, not be liable to pay anything more. On this count, therefore, the amount payable
beyond Rs.75,000/- was mulcted on to the Corporation in that case.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020
5. In a subsequent judgment, viz., Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation v. Kulsum and
Ors. (2011) 8 SCC 142 [“Kulsum”], this Court stated the question of law that arose for consideration
as follows:
“3. The question of law that arises for consideration in the instant and connected
appeals is formulated as under: if an insured vehicle (in this case a mini bus) is plying
under an agreement of contract with the Corporation, on the route as per permit
granted in favour of the Corporation, in case of an accident, whether the Insurance
Company would be liable to pay compensation or would it be the responsibility of the
Corporation or the owner?” It then referred to the definition of “owner” under
Section 2(30) 1 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and contrasted it with the definition
of “owner” in Section 2(19)2 of the 1939 Act.
It then went on to distinguish Kailash Nath Kothari(supra) as follows:
“16. In Kailash Nath Kothari [Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Kailash
Nath Kothari (1997) 7 SCC 481], a question had arisen with regard to the liability of
the insurance company, where the bus plied as per the contract with Rajasthan State
Road Transport Corporation. However, the said case was dealing with the earlier
Motor Vehicles Act of 1939. Taking into consideration the definition of “owner” as it
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
3

existed then in Section 2(19) of the old Act, it has been held in para 17 as 1 “2(30)
‘owner’ means a person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered, and where
such person is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle
which is the subject of a hire-purchase agreement, or an agreement of lease or an
agreement of hypothecation, the person in possession of the vehicle under that
agreement;” 2 “2(19) ‘owner’ means, where the person in possession of a motor
vehicle is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle
which is the subject of a hire-purchase agreement, the person in possession of the
vehicle under that agreement;” CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 under: (SCC
pp.487-88) “17. The definition of ‘owner’ under Section 2(19) of the Act is not
exhaustive. It has, therefore to be construed, in a wider sense, in the facts and
circumstances of a given case. The expression ‘owner’ must include, in a given case,
the person who has the actual possession and control of the vehicle and under whose
directions and commands the driver is obliged to operate the bus.
To confine the meaning of ‘owner’ to the registered owner only would in a case where the vehicle is
in the actual possession and control of the hirer not be proper for the purpose of fastening of liability
in case of an accident. The liability of the ‘owner’ is vicarious for the tort committed by its employee
during the course of his employment and it would be a question of fact in each case as to on whom
can vicarious liability be fastened in the case of an accident. In this case, Shri Sanjay Kumar, the
owner of the bus could not ply the bus on the particular route for which he had no permit and he in
fact was not plying the bus on that route. The services of the driver were transferred along with
complete ‘control’ to RSRTC, under whose directions, instructions and command the driver was to
ply or not to ply the ill-fated bus on the fateful day. The passengers were being carried by RSRTC on
receiving fare from them. Shri Sanjay Kumar was therefore not concerned with the passengers
travelling in that bus on the particular route on payment of fare to RSRTC. Driver of the bus, even
though an employee of the owner, was at the relevant time performing his duties under the order
and command of the conductor of RSRTC for operation of the bus. So far as the passengers of the
ill-fated bus are concerned, their privity of contract was only with the RSRTC to whom they had paid
the fare for travelling in that bus and their safety therefore became the responsibility of the RSRTC
while travelling in the bus. They had no privity of contract with Shri CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF
2020 Sanjay Kumar, the owner of the bus at all. Had it been a case only of transfer of services of the
driver and not of transfer of control of the driver from the owner to RSRTC, the matter may have
been somewhat different. But on facts in this case and in view of Conditions 4 to 7 of the agreement
(supra), the RSRTC must be held to be vicariously liable for the tort committed by the driver while
plying the bus under contract of the RSRTC. The general proposition of law and the presumption
arising therefrom that an employer, that is, the person who has the right to hire and fire the
employee, is generally responsible vicariously for the tort committed by the employee concerned
during the course of his employment and within the scope of his authority, is a rebuttable
presumption.” (emphasis in original) xxx xxx xxx “18. In our considered opinion, in the light of the
drastic and distinct changes incorporated in the definition of “owner” in the old Act and the present
Act, Kailash Nath's case [Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation v. Kailash Nath Kothari
(1997) 7 SCC 481] has no application to the facts of this case. We were unable to persuade ourselves
with the specific question which arose in this and connected appeals as the question projected in
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
4

these appeals was neither directly nor substantially in issue, in Kailash Nath's case [Rajasthan State
Road Transport Corporation v. Kailash Nath Kothari (1997) 7 SCC 481]. Thus, reference to the same
may not be of much help to us. Admittedly, in the said case, this Court was dealing with regard to
earlier definition of “owner” as found in Section 2(19) of the old Act.” Finally, the insurance
company was held liable stating:
“29. In the instant case, the driver was employed by Ajay Vishen, the owner of the bus
but evidently through Clause 4.4 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 of the
agreement, reproduced hereinabove, driver was supposed to drive the bus under the
instructions of the conductor who was appointed by the Corporation. The said driver
was also bound by all orders of the Corporation. Thus, it can safely be inferred that
effective control and command of the bus was that of the appellant.
30. Thus, for all practical purposes, for the relevant period, the Corporation had
become the owner of the vehicle for the specific period. If the Corporation had
become the owner even for the specific period and the vehicle having been insured at
the instance of original owner, it will be deemed that the vehicle was transferred
along with the insurance policy in existence to the Corporation and thus the
Insurance Company would not be able to escape its liability to pay the amount of
compensation.
31. The liability to pay compensation is based on a statutory provision. Compulsory
insurance of the vehicle is meant for the benefit of the third parties. The liability of
the owner to have compulsory insurance is only in regard to third party and not to
the property. Once the vehicle is insured, the owner as well as any other person can
use the vehicle with the consent of the owner. Section 146 of the Act does not provide
that any person who uses the vehicle independently, a separate insurance policy
should be taken. The purpose of compulsory insurance in the Act has been enacted
with an object to advance social justice.”
6. The law laid down in Kulsum’s case (supra) squarely applies to the facts of the present case. Also,
the argument based on Clause 10, which states as follows, “CLAUSE 10: The second party (Bus
owner) shall have full liability for any fault, negligence, accident, or other illegal acts of the driver
and liability for payment of any compensation or other dues whatsoever in this regard shall be that
of the owner of the bus or Insurance Company under the Acts. In no case, the First party (Petitioner
Corporation) shall have any liability for fault, negligence, accident, or other illegal acts of the driver.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2020 In case any payment is made by the First Party in compliance of
any order of any Court, etc., the First Party shall be authorized to recover the same.” is only between
the Corporation and the bus owner and does not bind anybody who is not privy to the aforesaid
agreement, least of all, the victim.
7. In this view of the matter, the appeal is allowed and the sum awarded by the MACT will now be
payable only by the Insurance Company with interest at the stated rate, within a period of three
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
5

months from today.
………………………………….,J.
[ ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN ] ………………………………….,J.
[ NAVIN SINHA ] ………………………………….,J.
[ B.R. GAVAI ] New Delhi;
June 08, 2020.
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Rajenderi Devi on 8 June, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41764358/
6
