Union Bank Of India vs Rajat Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. on 2 March,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 268, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
268 AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1172, AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1172
Author: Deepak Gupta
Bench: Aniruddha Bose, Deepak Gupta
                                                                                  1
                                                                  NON−REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1902 OF 2020
                      (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.28608 OF 2019)
          UNION BANK OF INDIA                                       …APPELLANT(S)
                                                 Versus
          RAJAT INFRASTRUCTURE PVT.
          LTD. & ORS.                                             …RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1903 OF 2020
                         (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.1753 OF 2020)
                                            JUDGMENT
Deepak Gupta, J.
Leave granted.
2. These appeals were initially directed against the order dated 25.11.2019 of the Bombay High
Court. By the said impugned order the High Court had relegated the appellant before it i.e.
respondent no. 1 herein to avail the statutory remedy of appeal before the Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal (for short ‘the DRAT’).
Union Bank Of India vs Rajat Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. on 2 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7768957/
1

3. The short question which arises for determination is whether the High Court was right in
directing that pre−deposit was not required for entertaining an appeal before the DRAT as
mandated by Section 18 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (for short ‘SARFAESI Act’).
4. It is not necessary to set out the facts of the case in detail in view of the decision which we propose
to take. The basic facts are that the respondent no. 1 stood guarantee and mortgaged its property for
repayment of loan availed by respondent nos. 4 and 5. The property was put to auction and
respondent nos. 2 and 3 who are the alleged leaseholders in possession of the property are the
highest bidders for a sum of Rs.65.52 crores. The main objection of the respondent no.1 to the sale is
that it is for a low amount and there is collusion between the officers of the Bank and the auction
purchaser. The petitioner challenged the order of the DRAT dated 11.11.2019 before the High Court
and the High Court passed the following order dated 25.11.2019:
“2. Relegating the Petitioner to the appellate remedy on account of aforenoted facts
and holding that the Petitioner has an efficacious alternate remedy of appeal before
the learned DRAT where no pre−deposit is required, the Petition is rejected without
making any observation on the merits of the disputes between the parties.”
5. It appears that the successful bidders filed review petitions before the High Court
praying that the High Court could not have issued directions that no pre−deposit was
required. Vide order dated 16.12.2019 the High Court dismissed the review petition
and the relevant observations of the High Court are as under:
“7. Suffice it to state that where a proposed sale notice is questioned with reference to
the reserve price fixed and the argument takes the form of considering valuation
report, such order, if challenged before DRAT, would not require any pre−deposit
being made for the reason under the impugned order, no decree has been passed or
liability fixed. It would depend on the nature of the order whether before the appeal
there against is entertained, should a pre−deposit be made.”
6. Mr. O.P. Gaggar, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the order of the
High Court is not only against the provisions of the Act but also against the law laid
down by this Court. Mr. Dushyant A. Dave, learned senior counsel for the auction
purchasers, respondent nos. 2 and 3, supported the case of the appellant and
submitted that the no appeal on behalf of respondent no. 1 can lie without complying
with the provisions of Section 18 of the SARFAESI Act which mandates the deposit of
50% or at least 25% of the amount due, as claimed by the secured creditor or
determined by the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT). On the other hand, Mr. Vikram
Chaudhri, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent no.1 urged that the
High Court has exercised its discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India while holding that it is not required to make pre−deposit. He
also submits that the respondent no.1 is not a borrower and finally submits that the
main ground is that since the amount offered by the highest bidder is below the value
Union Bank Of India vs Rajat Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. on 2 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7768957/
2

of the property, the DRAT is entitled to entertain the appeal without deposit of any
amount. It is submitted that the value of the property is about Rs.160 crores and even
the value as per the circle rate is about Rs.120 crores, but the same has been sold for a
pittance of Rs.65.52 crores. He also submitted that there is collusion between the
employees of the Bank and the successful bidders.
7. We may make it clear that we are not going into the merits of the case in view of
the fact that we agree with the High Court that the matter must be decided by the
DRAT. The only issue is whether the High Court was right in holding that no pre−
deposit was required. We may refer to Section 18 of the SARFAESI Act, which reads
as follows:
“18. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.—(1) Any person aggrieved, by any order made by
the Debts Recovery Tribunal under section 17, may prefer an appeal along with such
fee, as may be prescribed to an Appellate Tribunal within thirty days from the date of
receipt of the order of Debts Recovery Tribunal.
Provided that different fees may be prescribed for filing an appeal by the borrower or
by the person other than the borrower:
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained unless the borrower has
deposited with the Appellate Tribunal fifty per cent. of the amount of debt due from
him, as claimed by the secured creditors or determined by the Debts Recovery
Tribunal, whichever is less: Provided also that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the
reasons to be recorded in writing, reduce the amount to not less than twenty−five per
cent. of debt referred to in the second proviso.
xxx xxx xxx” This Court in the case of Narayan Chandra Ghosh vs. UCO Bank & Ors.1,
held that keeping in view the language of the Section even if the amount or debt due
had not been determined by the DRT, the appeal could not be entertained by the
DRAT without insisting on pre−deposit. The DRAT, at best could, after recording the
reasons, have reduced the amount to 25% but could not have totally waived the
deposit. This Court also held that the right of appeal conferred under Section 18(1) is
subject to the conditions laid down in the second proviso therein which postulates
that no appeal shall be entertained unless the borrower has deposited 50% of the
amount of debt due from him as claimed by the secured creditors or determined by
the DRT, whichever is less. The third proviso enables the DRAT, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, to reduce the amount of deposit to not less than 25%. The
following observations of this Court are relevant:
1 (2011) 4 SCC 548 “7…Thus, there is an absolute bar to the entertainment of an
appeal under Section 18 of the Act unless the condition precedent, as stipulated, is
fulfilled. Unless the borrower makes, with the Appellate Tribunal, a pre− deposit of
fifty per cent of the debt due from him or determined, an appeal under the said
Union Bank Of India vs Rajat Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. on 2 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7768957/
3

provision cannot be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal. The language of the said
proviso is clear and admits of no ambiguity.”
8. In view of the law laid down by this Court, we are clearly of the view that the
observation made by the High Court was totally incorrect.
9. We are not in agreement with the submission of Mr. Chaudhri that the High Court
has exercised its discretionary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution. The
order of the High Court does not show any exercise of such discretionary powers but
according to the High Court on an interpretation of the Section, pre−deposit was not
required. We are also not impressed with the argument of Mr. Chaudhri that his
client is not a borrower. A guarantor or a mortgagor, who has mortgaged its property
to secure the repayment of the loan, stands on the same footing as a borrower and if
he wants to file an appeal, he must comply with the terms of Section 18 of the
SARFAESI Act.
10. Furthermore, we may add that the High Court has no powers akin to powers
vested in this Court under Article 142 of the Constitution. The High Court cannot give
directions which are contrary to law.
11. In view of the above discussion, we set aside both the orders dated 25.11.2019 and
16.12.2019 of the High Court in so far as they hold that pre−deposit is not required
and allow the appeals.
We reiterate that we have not gone into the merits of the contentions raised by the parties which
shall be decided by the DRAT when it entertains the appeal and is called upon to do so. We extend
the time given to the auction purchasers, respondent nos. 2 and 3 to deposit the balance of the sale
amount till 20.03.2020. We also direct that in case respondent no.1 files an appeal within 30 days of
the pronouncement of this order it shall not be rejected on the ground of limitation.
12. Pending application(s), if any, stand(s), disposed of.
…………………………..J. (Deepak Gupta) …………………………..J. (Aniruddha Bose) New Delhi March 2,
2020
Union Bank Of India vs Rajat Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. on 2 March, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7768957/
4
