Union Of India vs Deepak Niranjan Nath Pandit on 7 February,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 1492, AIRONLINE 2020 SC
192, (2020) 1 SCT 836
Author: D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench: Indu Malhotra, Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
                                                           1
                                                                                        
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                            Civil Appeal No. 1236 of 2020
                                        (Arising out of SLP(C) No 1867 of 2020)
     Union of India & Anr                                                .... Appellant(
                                                        Versus
     Deepak Niranjan Nath Pandit                                         ....Respondent(
                                                  JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J 1 Leave granted.
2 The respondent, who is an Assistant Commissioner of Customs, GST and Central Excise was
transferred from Mumbai to Bhubaneshwar on 5 September 2019. Challenging the order of transfer,
the respondent moved the Central Administrative Tribunal 1 in OA No 627 of 2019. By an order
dated 17 September 2019, the CAT granted an ad interim stay of the order of transfer. Eventually,
after the OA was heard, it was dismissed by the CAT by an order dated 5 November 2019. Aggrieved
by the order of the CAT, the respondent moved the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. On ad
interim order. By the impugned judgment and order of the High Court 1“CAT” dated 2 December
2019, the Writ Petition 2 under Article 226 of the Constitution was admitted and by way of an
interim order, the ad interim direction granted on 11 November 2019 was continued. The Union of
India is in appeal.
3 The services of the respondent are transferable. The order of transfer was issued by the
Government of India in the Ministry of Finance (Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs) on 5
September 2019. By the order, five officials were transferred from their respective places of posting.
Union Of India vs Deepak Niranjan Nath Pandit on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146545131/
1

The respondent has, however, chosen to contest the order of transfer and as a result of the ad
interim order of the CAT and the interim order of the High Court has not joined at the place of
posting. In the meantime, the respondent has been suspended.
4 The High Court, in interfering with the order of transfer, has relied on two circumstances. Firstly,
the High Court has noted that as a result of the stay on the order of transfer, the headquarters of the
respondent will remain at Mumbai and even if he is to be suspended, his headquarters will continue
to remain at Mumbai. The second reason, which has weighed with the High Court, is that the spouse
of the respondent suffers from a cardiac ailment and is obtaining medical treatment in Mumbai. In
our view, neither of these reasons can furnish a valid justification for the High Court to take
recourse to its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution in passing an order of
injunction of this nature. Significantly, the High Court has not even found a prima facie case to the
effect that the order of transfer was either mala fide or in breach of law. The High Court 2Writ
Petition No 11669 of 2019 could not have dictated to the employer as to where the respondent
should be posted during the period of suspension. Individual hardships are matters for the Union of
India, as an employer, to take a dispassionate view. However, we are categorically of the view that
the impugned order of the High Court interfering with the order of transfer was in excess of
jurisdiction and an improper exercise of judicial power. We are constrained to observe that the
impugned order has been passed in breach of the settled principles and precedents which have
consistently been enunciated and followed by this Court. The manner in which judicial power has
been exercised by the High Court to stall a lawful order of transfer is disquieting. We express our
disapproval.
5 Mr Manan Kumar Mishra, learned Senior Counsel urged that during the course of an earlier
hearing, the Union government expressed its readiness to post the respondent at three alternative
places instead of Bhubaneswhar and hence the order of transfer may be modified. We decline to
allow this jurisdiction to be utilized in terrorem to compel the Union government to post the
respondent to a place which he may be prefer. There is no lawful reason for the respondent to cling
on to a posting at Mumbai. He cannot claim a posting as of right to a place of his choice. 6 We
accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the interim order of the High Court dated 2 December
2019 staying the transfer. The interim order passed by the High Court shall accordingly stand
vacated. Conditional on the respondent reporting at Bhubaneshwar within a period of one week
from today, he will be at liberty to make a representation to the Union of India in regard to his
transfer. We make it clear that we are not making any observations in this regard.
7 There shall be no order as to costs.
… … … … . . . … . . . … . . . . . . . … … … … … … . . . . . . . . J .  [ D r  D h a n a n j a y a  Y  C h a n d r a c h u d ]
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J. [Indu Malhotra] New Delhi;
February 07, 2020
Union Of India vs Deepak Niranjan Nath Pandit on 7 February, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146545131/
2
