V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Author: Krishna Murari
Bench: S. Ravindra Bhat, Krishna Murari, L. Nageswara Rao
                                                                                REPORTAB
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2701-2704 OF 2020
                         (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 6952-6955 OF 20
                SRI V.N.KRISHNA              MURTHY      &    ANR.   …..     APPELLANT(S
                ETC.ETC.
                                            VERSUS
                SRI RAVIKUMAR & ORS. ETC.ETC.                        …..   RESPONDENT(S)
                                                JUDGMENT
KRISHNA MURARI, J.
The instant appeals have been filed against the common judgment dated 21.02.2019 passed by the
High Court of Karnataka, Principal Bench at Bengaluru in R.F.A. Nos. 1434 of 2017, 1435 of 2017,
1436 of 2017 and 1775 of 2017 declining to grant leave to file an appeal.
2. Necessary facts in brief for the adjudication of controversy can be summarized as under :-
Disputes relates to land comprised in Survey No. 105/3 measuring 37 guntas, Survey
No. 105/9 measuring 34 guntas and Survey No. 105/4B measuring 20 guntas, situate
at Village Jakkur, Bengaluru, North Taluk. Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 herein who were
recorded owner of the land in dispute executed a registered agreement of sale of the
land in dispute in favour of Respondent, Karnataka State Khadi and Village
Industries Worker’s House Building Co-operative Society Ltd. Besides executing
registered agreement to sale dated 31.10.1989 and 05.08.1992 side by side they also
executed a General Power of Attorney in favour of office bearers of the respondent
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
1

society authorizing them to enter into sale transaction of the suit property on their
behalf. It is to be taken note of that General Power of Attorney was executed giving
absolute rights to the Attorney to do all such acts which are necessary for sale of the
property.
3. On the strength of General Power of Attorney, sale deeds in respect of land in dispute was
executed by the Attorneys in favour of appellants on various dates.
4. Respondents–Plaintiffs filed four Original Suits being O.S. Nos. 1529 of 2014, 1532 of 2014, 1534
of 2014 and 7758 of 2016 seeking the following reliefs :-
a) To declare that the registered agreement to sell dated
05.08.1992, as barred by limitation in view of time being the essence of contract, and beyond the
period of limitation, be declared as null and void, illegal unenforceable and inoperative and not
binding on the plaintiffs.
b) To declare and cancel the registered further agreement for sell dated 31.10.1989 executed by
Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 in favour of defendant society which is registered as document bearing no.
1194/92-93, in book no.I, stored in vol no. 27 at pages 86-88 in the office of the Sub Registrar
Yelahanka Bangalore as well as unregistered agreement to sell dated 23.05.1988 as barred by time,
alternatively in case of default by the 3 rd defendant, this Hon’ble Court be pleased to execute
cancellation agreement to sell through court commissioner.
c) The 3rd defendant be directed to execute a registered cancellation deed before the jurisdictional
Sub Registrar.
d) To award and issue a judgment and decree of permanent injunction restraining the Defendant/s,
their agents or anybody acting on their behalf from interfering with the possession suit schedule
property.
e) Injunction restraining the defendants their agents, servants, officials, assigns or anyone acting or
claiming on their behalf from demolishing or in any way entering upon or in any way interfering
property.
        f)           The defendants be directed to pay the cost of the
                     proceedings.
        g)           And further the Hon’ble Court be pleased to award pass
such other just and equitable relief/s as this Hon’ble Court deems fit in the circumstances of the suit
and award costs in the interest of justice and equity.
5. Suits were filed on the allegations that suit property is ancestral property and the plaintiffs were
co-owner and thus defendant had no right to execute the agreement of sale ignoring the interest of
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
2

the plaintiff. It was also pleaded that since the agreement of sale did not culminate into a sale
transaction, the same are barred by law of limitation and are thus unenforceable. It may be relevant
to mention at this stage that the sale deeds executed in favour of appellants by the attorneys of the
recorded land holder were not questioned in the suit and were neither subject matter of dispute
therein nor any relief was claimed in their respect.
6. The Trial Court vide its judgment dated 27.07.2016, decreed the suit by passing the following
decree:-
“It is ordered and decreed that the suit of the plaintiffs is decreed.
It is further ordered and decreed that the registered agreement of sale dated
30.10.1989 and 05.08.1992 is barred by limitation and not binding on the plaintiffs.
It is further ordered and decreed that the defendant-society or anybody on their
behalf permanently restrained from interfering with the plaintiff’s peacefully
possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property.
It is further ordered and decreed that the parties are directed to bear their own
costs.”
7. During the pendency of the suit proceedings, the appellants made an application under Order 1
Rule 10 (2) CPC for impleadment which was dismissed by the Trial Court. The order was challenged
by filing a Writ Petition before the High Court which came to be dismissed as infructuous as the suit
itself came to be decided, in the meantime.
8. Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the Trial Court, the appellants preferred R.F.A. Nos.
1434 of 2017, 1435 of 2017, 1436 of 2017 and 1775 of 2017. The appeals were duly accompanied by an
application seeking leave to appeal against the judgment and decree.
9. High Court vide a common judgment and order impugned in these appeals while declining to
grant leave to file an appeal rejected the application.
10. The High Court while dismissing the application made by the appellants seeking leave to appeal
has observed that:-
“It is true that the Trial Court has granted a very peculiar declaratory relief which in
my opinion the plaintiffs in the suit could have set up by way of defence, had they
been sued by the Housing Society for specific performance. Be that as it may, all the
applicants/appellants claim to be in possession of their respective sites on the
strength of the sale deeds executed by the General Power of Attorney holders of the
owners of the lands. What is stated is that the agreements of sale were executed in
favour of the Housing Society and that Power of Attorney was executed in favour of
some persons who are office bearers of the Housing Society. If this is the position, I
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
3

think that the applicants/appellants do have an independent right which they appear
to have derived on the basis of the sale deeds executed by the owners of the land. It
may be a fact that the sale deeds were executed by the Power of Attorney holders of
the owner, but in reality those sale deeds were executed by the owners of the land
and, therefore, it can be said that the nature of declaratory relief granted by the Trial
Court in the suit does not affect the interest of the applicants/appellants.” The Trial
Court further went on to observe that; “if they are in possession of the sites purchased
by them, they have to protect their possession by filing independent suits. I do not
think they have a remedy by filing an appeal challenging the judgment in the suit”.
11. Learned Counsel for the appellants argues before us that the interest of the appellants is directly
involved in the subject matter of the suit. They have become absolute owners of the sites in question
on the basis of sale deeds. The judgment of the Trial Court holding the sale agreements time barred
and granting a decree of permanent injunction actually affects their interests as they are in
possession of the suit property.
12. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents vehemently contended that the claim of
the appellants herein is based on the sale deeds executed on the strength of the General Power of
Attorney executed by the recorded owners of the suit property. There is neither any reference of the
sale deeds in the suit nor the sale deeds refer to any agreement to sell. Therefore, the relief claimed,
if any, by the appellants based on sale deeds in their favour is entirely different, and there is no locus
to challenge the decree passed by the Trial Court and their application for leave to appeal has rightly
been dismissed.
13. We have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
14. In the backdrop of above facts, the question which arises for our consideration is as to whether
the appellants held the locus to question the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court and
whether the High Court was justified in rejecting their leave to appeal.
15. Section 96 and 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure provide for preferring an appeal from any
original decree or from decree in appeal respectively. The aforesaid provisions do not enumerate the
categories of persons who can file an appeal. However, it is a settled legal proposition that a stranger
cannot be permitted to file an appeal in any proceedings unless he satisfies the Court that he falls
with the category of aggrieved persons. It is only where a judgment and decree prejudicially affects a
person who is not party to the proceedings, he can prefer an appeal with the leave of the Appellate
Court. Reference be made to the observation of this Court in Smt. Jatan Kumar Golcha Vs. Golcha
Properties Private Ltd.1:-
“It is well settled that a person who is not a party to the suit may prefer an appeal
with the leave of the Appellate Court and such leave should be granted if he would be
prejudicially affected by the Judgment.”
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
4

16. This Court in State of Punjab & Ors. Vs. Amar Singh & Anr.2 while dealing with the
maintainability of appeal by a person who is not party to a suit has observed thus :-
“Firstly, there is a catena of authorities which, following the dictum of Lindley, L.J.,
in re Securities Insurance Co., [(1894) 2 Ch 410] have laid down the rule that a
person who is not a party to a decree or order may with the leave of the Court, prefer
an appeal from such decree or order if he is either bound by the order or is aggrieved
by it or is prejudicially affected by it.”
17. In Baldev Singh Vs. Surinder Mohan Sharma and Ors 3., this Court held that an appeal under
Section 96 of the Civil Procedure Code, would be maintainable only at the instance of a person
aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree. While dealing with the concept of
person aggrieved, it was observed in paragraph 15 as under:-
1 (1970) 3 SCC 573 2 (1974) 2 SCC 70 3 (2003) 1 SCC 34 “A person aggrieved to file
an appeal must be one whose right is affected by reason of the judgment and decree
sought to be impugned.”
18. In A. Subash Babu Vs. State of A.P. and Anr.4, this Court held as under:-
“The expression ‘aggrieved person’ denotes an elastic and an elusive concept. It
cannot be confined that the bounds of a rigid, exact and comprehensive definition. Its
scope and meaning depends on diverse, variable factors such as the content and
intent of the statute of which contravention is alleged, the specific circumstances of
the case, the nature and extent of the complainant’s interest and the nature and
extent of the prejudice or injuries suffered by him.”
19. The expression ‘person aggrieved’ does not include a person who suffers from a psychological or
an imaginary injury; a person aggrieved must, therefore, necessarily be one, whose right or interest
has been adversely affected or jeopardized (vide Shanti Kumar R. Canji Vs. Home Insurance Co. of
New York 5 and State of Rajasthan & Ors. Vs. Union of India & Ors.6).
20. In Srimathi K. Ponnalagu Ammani Vs. The State Of Madras represented by the Secretary to the
Revenue Department, Madras and Ors .7, this Court laid down the test to find out when it would be
proper to grant leave to appeal to a person not a party to a proceeding against the decree or
judgment passed in such proceedings in following words:-
4 (2011) 7 SCC 616 5 (1974) 2 SCC 387 6 (1977) 3 SCC 592 7 66 Law Weekly 136
“Now, what is the test to find out when it would be proper to grant leave to appeal to
a person not a party to a proceeding against the decree or judgment in such
proceedings? We think it would be improper to grant leave to appeal to every person
who may in some remote or indirect way be prejudicially affected by a decree or
judgment. We think that ordinarily leave to appeal should be granted to persons who,
though not parties to the proceedings, would be bound by the decree or judgment in
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
5

that proceeding and who would be precluded from attacking its correctness in other
proceedings.”
21. Applying the above tests, we are of the considered opinion that appellants can neither be said to
be aggrieved persons nor bound by the judgment and decree of the Trial Court in any manner. The
relief claimed in the suit was cancellation of agreement to sell. On the other hand, the sale deeds
which were the basis of the claim of the appellants were executed on the basis of General Power of
Attorney, and had nothing to do with the agreement to sell which was subject matter of suit. The
judgment and decree of the Trial Court is in no sense a judgment in rem and it is binding only as
between the plaintiffs and defendants of the suit, and not upon the appellants.
22. Though it has been vehemently contended before us and also pleaded before the High Court that
the judgment and decree of the Trial Court affects the appellants adversely. The appellants have
failed to place any material or demonstrate as to how the judgment and decree passed by the Trial
Court adversely or prejudicially affects them. Mere saying that the appellants are prejudicially
affected by the decree is not sufficient. It has to be demonstrated that the decree affects the legal
rights of the appellants and would have adverse effect when carried out. Facts of the case clearly
demonstrate that suit which has been decreed is confined only to a declaration sought in respect of
an agreement to sell. Injunction was also sought only against the defendant- society or its officers or
assigns. There is not even a whisper in the entire plaint or in suit proceedings about the sale deed
executed in favour of the appellants by the General Power of Attorney holders or even for that
matter in the judgment and decree of the Trial Court.
23. The appellants have thus failed to demonstrate that they are prejudicially or adversely affected
by the decree in question or any of their legal rights stands jeopardized so as to bring them within
the ambit of the expression ‘person aggrieved’ entitling them to maintain appeal against the decree.
24. In view of the facts and discussions, we find no infirmity in the judgment of the High Court
dismissing the application filed by the appellants seeking leave to appeal against the decree. The
appeals, accordingly, stand dismissed. However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
.................................J. (L. NAGESWARA RAO) ...............................J. (KRISHNA MURARI)
...............................J. (S. RAVINDRA BHAT) NEW DELHI;
21ST AUGUST, 2020
V.N. Krishna Murthy vs Sri Ravikumar on 21 August, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102375005/
6
