Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December,
2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 929
Author: Sanjiv Khanna
Bench: N.V. Ramana, Sanjiv Khanna, Krishna Murari
                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2402 OF 2019
            VIDYA DROLIA AND OTHERS                              .....   APPELLANT(S)
                                           VERSUS
            DURGA TRADING CORPORATION                            ..... RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 5605-5606 OF 2019
                                                    AND
                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION NO. 11877 OF 2020
                                          JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
This judgment decides the reference to three Judges made vide order dated 28th February, 2019 in
Civil Appeal No. 2402 of 2019 titled Vidya Drolia and Others v. Durga Trading Corporation,1 as it
doubts the legal ratio expressed in Himangni Enterprises v. Kamaljeet Singh Ahluwalia2 that
landlord-tenant disputes governed by the provisions of the Transfer of Property 1 2019 SCC OnLine
SC 358 2 (2017) 10 SCC 706 Act, 1882, are not arbitrable as this would be contrary to public policy.
2. A deeper consideration of the order of reference reveals that the issues required to be answered
relate to two aspects that are distinct and yet interconnected, namely:
(i) meaning of non-arbitrability and when the subject matter of the dispute is not
capable of being resolved through arbitration; and
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
1

(ii) the conundrum – “who decides” – whether the court at the reference stage or the
arbitral tribunal in the arbitration proceedings would decide the question of
non-arbitrability.
The second aspect also relates to the scope and ambit of jurisdiction of the court at the referral stage
when an objection of non-arbitrability is raised to an application under Section 8 or 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, the ‘Arbitration Act’).
3. We are not reproducing and examining the factual matrix, as we are only answering the legal
issues raised. However, we would refer, in brief, to the legal reasoning and the ratio in Himangni
Enterprises and the counter view expressed in the order of reference in Vidya Drolia.
4. Himangni Enterprises upheld the decision of the High Court and the District Court rejecting the
application filed by the defendant- tenant under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act in a civil suit
seeking its eviction from a shop in a commercial complex in New Delhi. The suit was also for the
recovery of arrears of rent and permanent injunction. The tenancy in question was not protected
under the rent control legislation and the rights and obligations were governed by the Transfer of
Property Act. Two Judges of this Court held that the issue of non-arbitrability is no longer res
integra as it stood answered by decisions in Natraj Studios (P) Ltd. v. Navrang Studios3 and Booz
Allen & Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance Ltd.4 In Natraj Studios (P) Ltd., wherein an application
under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 was dismissed as the tenancy was protected under the
Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging Houses Rates Control Act, 1947, it was observed that on broader
consideration of public policy, the arbitrator lacked jurisdiction to decide the question whether the
licensee-landlord was entitled to seek possession. The dispute could be exclusively 3 (1981) 1 SCC
523 4 (2011) 5 SCC 532: (2011) 2 SCC (Civ) 781 decided by the Court of Small Causes, which alone
had jurisdiction. In Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc., it was held that in eviction or tenancy matters
governed by special statutes and where the tenant enjoys statutory protection, only the specified
court has been conferred jurisdiction. Himangni Enterprises relying on the said ratios holds that
though the Delhi Rent Act is not applicable, it does not follow that the Arbitration Act would be
applicable so as to confer jurisdiction on the arbitrator. Even in cases of tenancies governed by the
Transfer of Property Act, the dispute would be triable by the civil court and not by the arbitrator.
The exemption from the applicability of the Rent Act could be withdrawn and thereupon the rights
would be governed by the rent control legislation.
5. In Vidya Drolia, another division bench referring to Section 11(6- A) has observed that the referral
stage requirement is to only examine ‘existence of an arbitration agreement’ and not validity of the
arbitration agreement. 246th Report of the Law Commission of India had suggested twin
examination whether the agreement ‘exists’ or is ‘null and void’, albeit the Section 11(6-A), as
enacted, requires ‘existence of an arbitration agreement’, and the prerequisite that the arbitration
agreement should not be ‘null and void’ was deliberately omitted. The wording of Section 11(6-A)
was contrasted with Section 16(1) to draw distinction between ‘validity of an arbitration agreement’
and ‘existence of an arbitration agreement’. Reference was made to observations of Kurian Joseph,
J. in Duro Felguera, S.A v. Gangavaram Port Limited,5 to the effect that the scope of Section 11(6-A)
is limited, only to see whether an arbitration agreement exists – nothing more, nothing less. The
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
2

legislative policy and purpose are to essentially minimize judicial intervention at the appointment
stage. Referring to Sections 111, 114 and 114A of the Transfer of Property Act, it is observed that
there is nothing in this Act and law to show that a dispute relating to the determination of lease,
arrears of rent etc. cannot be decided by an arbitrator. The grounds predicated on public policy
could be raised before the arbitrator as they could be raised before the court. The arbitrator could
well abide by the provisions of Sections 114 and 114A, and apply the public policy considerations for
the protection of tenants as a class. Referring to Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc., it was observed that
the right in rem is a right exercisable against the world at large and is not amenable to 5 (2017) 9
SCC 729 arbitration, whereas in case of rights in personam an interest is protected against a specific
individual, and is referable to arbitration. Further, subordinate rights in personam arising from
rights in rem have always been considered to be arbitrable. Decision in Natraj Studios (P) Ltd. was
distinguishable, as the rent control legislation being applicable, the tenancy disputes were to be
exclusively decided by the small cause court in Bombay. The legislation had provided that no other
court would have jurisdiction to entertain any suit, proceedings or deal with such claim or questions.
The exception in the form of non-arbitrable landlord- tenant disputes, as per Booz Allen & Hamilton
Inc., was confined only to those cases/matters governed by: (i) special statues, (ii) where the tenant
enjoys statutory protection and (iii) where only specific courts are conferred jurisdiction to decide
disputes. Transfer of Property Act does not negate arbitrability. In Olympus Superstructures Pvt.
Ltd. v. Meena Vijay Khetan and Others,6 it was held that there is no prohibition in the Specific
Relief Act, 1963 for referring disputes relating to specific performance of contracts to arbitration.
Equally, the discretion to refuse or grant specific performance would not militate against
arbitrability. Reference was 6 (1999) 5 SCC 651 made to Vimal Kishor Shah and Others v. Jayesh
Dinesh Shah and Other,7 which had referred to Dhulabhai Etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh and
Another,8 in the context of whether the disputes under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 were arbitrable.
The disputes under the Trusts Act were held to be non-arbitrable by necessary implication, as the
Trusts Act had conferred specific powers on the principal judge of the civil court, which powers an
arbitrator could not exercise. The judgment in Vimal Kishor Shah was followed by another Division
Bench in Emaar MGF Land Limited v. Aftab Singh,9 a case relating to the Consumer Protection Act,
1986. Reasoning that the exemption from rent control legislation can be withdrawn and thereupon
Arbitration Act would not apply, it was observed, was not a valid justification and ground to hold
that the subject matter was not arbitrable.
6. Learned counsel for the parties have primarily relied upon the reasoning given in Himangni
Enterprises and Vidya Drolia and have referred to other case law which we would subsequently
examine. To avoid prolixity and repetition, we are not reproducing the respective contentions and
arguments, as the same would be 7 (2016) 8 SCC 788 8 (1968) 3 SCR 662 9 (2019) 12 SCC 751 dealt
with and appreciated during the course of our reasoning.
However, we acknowledge that the oral submissions and compilations have been of immense help.
Similarly, scholarly writings in books and articles expressing diverse views on non- arbitrability and
Who Decides Non-arbitrability have facilitated us unclog the legal and jurisprudential nuances and
contradictions to try and resolve the issues in the context of domestic law of arbitration in India.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
3

7. At the outset we begin with the caveat that this judgment does not examine and interpret the
transnational provisions of arbitration in Part II of the Arbitration Act.
Non-Arbitrability
8. Non-arbitrability is basic for arbitration as it relates to the very jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal. An arbitral tribunal may lack jurisdiction for several reasons. Non-arbitrability has
multiple meanings. Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. refers to three facets of non-arbitrability, namely: -
“(i) Whether the disputes are capable of adjudication and settlement by arbitration?
That is, whether the disputes, having regard to their nature, could be resolved by a
private forum chosen by the parties (the Arbitral Tribunal) or whether they would
exclusively fall within the domain of public fora (courts).
(ii) Whether the disputes are covered by the arbitration agreement? That is, whether
the disputes are enumerated or described in the arbitration agreement as matters to
be decided by arbitration or whether the disputes fall under the “excepted matters”
excluded from the purview of the arbitration agreement.
(iii) Whether the parties have referred the disputes to arbitration? That is, whether
the disputes fall under the scope of the submission to the Arbitral Tribunal, or
whether they do not arise out of the statement of claim and the counterclaim filed
before the Arbitral Tribunal. A dispute, even if it is capable of being decided by
arbitration and falling within the scope of an arbitration agreement, will not be
“arbitrable” if it is not enumerated in the joint list of disputes referred to arbitration,
or in the absence of such a joint list of disputes, does not form part of the disputes
raised in the pleadings before the Arbitral Tribunal.” John J. Barcelo III, in his paper
titled ‘Who Decides the Arbitrator’s Jurisdiction? Separability and Competence-
Competence in Transnational Perspective’,10 in the context of transnational commercial
transactions, has divided facets relating to non-arbitrability into seven categories:
“Stage 1# is crucial concerning whether arbitration is allowed to go forward
efficaciously or is obstructed by court intervention. At Stage 1, a party opposing
arbitration may raise any of a series of legal issues requiring court, rather than
arbitrator, decision. These may include any or all of the following claims: (1) the
container contract is invalid (for a reason that would not directly invalidate the
arbitration clause); (2) no arbitration agreement came into existence between the
parties; (3) an existing arbitration agreement is either 10 Vanderbilt Journal of
Transnational Law, vol. 36, no.4, October 2003, p. 1115-1136 formally invalid (for
example, not in writing) or materially invalid (for example, violative of mandatory
law); (4) a disputed issue is not within the scope of the arbitration agreement; (5)
mandatory law prohibits a disputed issue, though within the scope of the parties’
arbitration agreement, to be arbitrated (a special type of material invalidity
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
4

respecting a specific issue fraught with public policy concerns, such as (formerly)
antitrust or securities fraud); (6) some precondition for permissible arbitration has
not been met (for example, a time-limit on initiating arbitration); (7) the party
seeking arbitration has waived its right to arbitrate or is estopped from claiming that
right.” (#Stage 1 is the referral stage.)
9. Validity of the legal ratio in Himangni Enterprises cannot be decided without examining when a
subject matter or dispute is non-arbitrable. Understanding of the different facets of non-
arbitrability is important as it would help us appreciate the consequences. This would assist in
deciding whether the court or the arbitral tribunal has the jurisdiction to decide the particular facet
of non-arbitrability. The jurisdiction could well depend on the nature and type of the
non-arbitrability alleged. The order of reference in Vidya Drolia draws distinction for the purpose of
exercise of jurisdiction between non-arbitrability on account of existence and non-arbitrability on
account of the validity of an arbitration agreement.
10. Arbitration is a private dispute resolution mechanism whereby two or more parties agree to
resolve their current or future disputes by an arbitral tribunal, as an alternative to adjudication by
the courts or a public forum established by law. Parties by mutual agreement forgo their right in law
to have their disputes adjudicated in the courts/public forum. Arbitration agreement gives
contractual authority to the arbitral tribunal to adjudicate the disputes and bind the parties. The
expression ‘arbitration agreement’ has been defined in clause (d) of sub-section (2) to mean an
agreement as defined in Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. Section 7 of the Arbitration Act reads:
“7. Arbitration agreement. — (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an
agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship,
whether contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract
or in the form of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in—
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication
which provide a record of the agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defense in which the existence of the
agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
5

(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause
constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is
such as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract.”
11. The term ‘agreement’ is not defined in the Arbitration Act, albeit it is defined in Section 10 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (for short, the ‘Contract Act’),11 as contracts made by free consent of
parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not
thereby expressly declared to be void. Section 10 of the Contract Act also stipulates that aforesaid
requirements shall not affect any law in force in India (and not expressly repealed) by which a
contract is required to be made in writing, in presence of witnesses or any law relating to
registration of documents. Thus, an arbitration agreement should satisfy the mandate of Section 10
of the Contract Act, in addition to satisfying 11 10. What agreements are contracts. — All agreements
are contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful
consideration and with a lawful object, and are not hereby expressly declared to be void. Nothing
herein contained shall affect any law in force in India, and not hereby expressly repealed, by which
any contract is required to be made in writing or in the presence of witnesses, or any law relating to
the registration of documents. other requirements stipulated in the Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.
Sections 12 to 18 of the Contract Act state when a person can be said to be of a sound mind for the
purpose of contracting and define the expressions ‘consent’, ‘free consent’, ‘coercion’, ‘undue
influence’, ‘fraud’ and ‘misrepresentation’. Sections 19 to 23 relate to voidability of agreements, the
power to set aside contracts induced by undue influence, when both the parties are under mistake as
to a matter of fact, effect of a mistake as to the law, effect of a mistake by one party as to a matter of
fact and what considerations and objects are lawful and unlawful. Sections 24 to 30 relate to void
contracts and Sections 26 and 27 therein state that agreements in restraint of marriage and
agreements in restraint of trade, respectively are void, albeit Explanation (1) to Section 27 saves
agreements for not carrying out the business of which goodwill is sold. Section 28 of the Contract
Act states that agreements in restraint of legal proceedings are void, but Explanation (1) specifically
saves contracts by which two or more persons agree that any dispute, or one which may arise
between them, in respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be referred to arbitration.
Arbitration agreement must satisfy the objective mandates of the law of contract to qualify as an
agreement. Clauses (g) and (h) of Section 2 of the Contract Act state that an agreement not
enforceable in law is void and an agreement enforceable in law is a contract. As a sequitur, it follows
that an arbitration agreement that is not enforceable in law is void and not legally valid.
12. Sub-section (1) to Section 7 ordains that the arbitration agreement should be in respect of
disputes arising from a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not. The expression ‘legal
relationship’, again not defined in the Arbitration Act, means a relationship which gives rise to legal
obligations and duties and, therefore, confers a right. These rights may be contractual or even
non-contractual.12 Non-contractual disputes would require a separate or submission arbitration
agreement based on the cause of action arising in tort, restitution, breach of statutory duty or some
other non-contractual cause of action.13 12 Legal relationship will be normally followed by certain
immediate or remote consequences in the form of action or non-action by the judicial and executive
agents of the society as distinct from purely private affairs or other events which have nothing to do
with law. Legal relationship exists in every situation that is or may be procedurally asserted for a
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
6

declaration or denial of a right or for imposition of a sanction or any other purpose within the scope
of adjudicative action. In actual practice, objection regarding defined legal relationship is seldom
raised and tested. 13 Russell on Arbitration, 24th Edition # 2-004
13. Sub-section (2) to Section 7 is of some importance as it states that an arbitration clause may be
in the form of a separate agreement or form a part of the underlying or another contract. Clause (3)
of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act states that the arbitration agreement shall be in writing, that is,
the agreement should be evidenced in writing. By clause (4) the term ‘arbitration agreement in
writing’ would include any agreement by exchange of letters, telegrams, electronic mails or
communications which provide a record of the agreement or exchange of statements of claim and
defence in which one party claims the existence of the agreement and the other party does not deny
it. Sub-section (5) to Section 7 states that reference in a contract to a document containing an
arbitration clause would constitute a valid arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and
reference is made to the arbitration clause that forms a part of the contract.
14. Questions as to the existence of an arbitration agreement also arise when a party opposing the
reference raises plea of novation of contract by entering into a new contract in substitution of the
original or ‘accord and satisfaction’ by acceptance of modified obligations in discharge of the
contract by performance or simple termination by express or implied consent. Similar plea of
discharge can be raised opposing an application for reference on the ground that the claim is long
barred and dead or there are no outstanding disputes as the parties have accepted part performance
or have absolved the other side from performance, fully or partly, on account of frustration or
otherwise. The contention is that once the original contract stands extinguished, abandoned,
repudiated or substituted, the arbitration clause in the underlying/original contract perishes with it.
15. Arbitration being a matter of contract, the parties are entitled to fix boundaries as to confer and
limit the jurisdiction and legal authority of the arbitrator. An arbitration agreement can be
comprehensive and broad to include any dispute or could be confined to specific disputes. The issue
of scope of arbitrator’s jurisdiction invariably arises when the disputes that are arbitrable are
enumerated or the arbitration agreement provides for exclusions as in case of ‘excepted matters’.
The arbitration agreement may be valid, but the arbitral tribunal in view of the will of the parties
expressed in the arbitration agreement, may not have jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute. The will
of the parties as to the scope of arbitration is a subjective act and personal to the parties.
16. Another facet, not highlighted earlier, arises from the dictum in Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. v.
Jayesh H. Pandya and Another,14 a decision upholding rejection of an application under Section 8,
on the ground that there is no provision in the Arbitration Act to bifurcate and divide the causes or
parties, that is, the subject matter of the suit/judicial proceedings, and parties to the arbitration
agreement. The suit should be in respect of a ‘matter’ which the parties have agreed to refer and
which comes within the ambit of the arbitration agreement. The words ‘a matter’, it was interpreted,
would indicate that the entire subject matter of the suit should be subject to arbitration agreement.
Bifurcation of subject matter or causes of action in the suit is not permissible and contemplated.
Similarly, the parties to the suit should be bound by the arbitration agreement, as there is no
provision in the Arbitration Act to compel third persons who have not exercised the option to give
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
7

up the right to have access to courts and be bound by the arbitration clause. This would violate party
autonomy and consensual nature 14 (2003) 5 SCC 531 of arbitration. Bifurcation in such cases
would result in a suit being divided into two parts, one being decided by the arbitral tribunal, and
the other by the court or judicial authorities. This would defeat the entire purpose and inevitably
delay the proceedings and increase cost of litigation, cause harassment and on occasions give rise to
conflicting judgments and orders by two different fora. Cause of action in relation to the subject
matter relates to the scope of the arbitration agreement and whether the dispute can be resolved by
arbitration. Second mandate relating to common parties exposits the inherent limitation of the
arbitration process which is consensual and mutual, an aspect we would subsequently examine.
17. A two Judges’ Bench in Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc., while interpreting the dictum in Sukanya
Holdings (P) Ltd., had drawn a distinction between ambit and scope of judicial inquiry while
deciding an application under Section 8(1) of the Arbitration Act which is filed in pending civil
suit/judicial proceedings and an application for reference of the dispute to arbitration under Section
11 of the Arbitration Act. In Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. it was observed:
“32. The nature and scope of issues arising for consideration in an application under
Section 11 of the Act for appointment of arbitrators, are far narrower than those
arising in an application under Section 8 of the Act, seeking reference of the parties
to a suit to arbitration. While considering an application under Section 11 of the Act,
the Chief Justice or his designate would not embark upon an examination of the issue
of “arbitrability” or appropriateness of adjudication by a private forum, once he finds
that there was an arbitration agreement between or among the parties, and would
leave the issue of arbitrability for the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal. If the
arbitrator wrongly holds that the dispute is arbitrable, the aggrieved party will have
to challenge the award by filing an application under Section 34 of the Act, relying
upon sub-section (2)(b)(i) of that section.” However, in SBP & Co. v. Patel
Engineering Ltd. and Another,15 the majority judgment of the Constitution Bench of
seven Judges had noticed the complementary nature of Sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration Act, and has observed:
“16. We may at this stage notice the complementary nature of Sections 8 and 11.
Where there is an arbitration agreement between the parties and one of the parties,
ignoring it, files an action before a judicial authority and the other party raises the
objection that there is an arbitration clause, the judicial authority has to consider that
objection and if the objection is found sustainable to refer the parties to arbitration.
The expression used in this section is “shall” and this Court in P. Anand Gajapathi
Raju v. P.V.G. Raju and in Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Pinkcity Midway
Petroleums has held that the judicial authority is bound to refer the matter to
arbitration once the existence of a valid arbitration clause is established. Thus, the
judicial authority is entitled to, has to and is 15 (2005) 8 SCC 618 bound to decide the
jurisdictional issue raised before it, before making or declining to make a reference.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
8

Section 11 only covers another situation. Where one of the parties has refused to act in terms of the
arbitration agreement, the other party moves the Chief Justice under Section 11 of the Act to have an
arbitrator appointed and the first party objects, it would be incongruous to hold that the Chief
Justice cannot decide the question of his own jurisdiction to appoint an arbitrator when in a parallel
situation, the judicial authority can do so. Obviously, the highest judicial authority has to decide that
question and his competence to decide cannot be questioned. If it is held that the Chief Justice has
no right or duty to decide the question or cannot decide the question, it will lead to an anomalous
situation in that a judicial authority under Section 8 can decide, but not a Chief Justice under
Section 11, though the nature of the objection is the same and the consequence of accepting the
objection in one case and rejecting it in the other, is also the same, namely, sending the parties to
arbitration. The interpretation of Section 11 that we have adopted would not give room for such an
anomaly.” We are clearly bound by the dictum of the Constitutional Bench judgment in Patel
Engineering Ltd. that the scope and ambit of court’s jurisdiction under Section 8 or 11 of the
Arbitration Act is similar. An application under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act need not set out in
detail the disputes or the claims and may briefly refer to the subject matter or broad contours of the
dispute. However, where judicial proceedings are initiated and pending, specific details of the claims
and disputes are normally pleaded and, therefore, the court or the judicial authority has the
advantage of these details. There is a difference between a non-arbitrable claim and non-arbitrable
subject matter. Former may arise on account of scope of the arbitration agreement and also when
the claim is not capable of being resolved through arbitration. Generally non-arbitrability of the
subject matter would relate to non-arbitrability in law. Further, the decision in Sukanya Holdings
(P) Ltd. has to be read along with subsequent judgment of this Court in Chloro Controls India
Private Limited v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc. and Others.16 The effect of amendment by
Act 3 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 20.10.2015 on Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act
with the stipulation that the amendments apply notwithstanding any earlier judgment has been
examined by us under the heading Who Decides Non-arbitrability.
18. Sub-section (3) to Section 2 of the Arbitration Act states:
“Section 2(3)- this Part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by
virtue of which certain disputes may not be submitted to arbitration.” The Arbitration
Act clearly recognizes and accepts that certain disputes or subjects are not capable of
being resolved by arbitration. Similarly, Section 34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act
states that the courts may set aside awards when they find that “the 16 (2013) 1 SCC
641 subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration”.
However, the two sub-sections conspicuously do not enumerate or categorize
non-arbitrable matters or state the principles for determining when a dispute is
non-arbitrable by virtue of any other law17 for the time being in force. It is left to the
courts by ex visceribus actus to formulate the principles for determining
non-arbitrability. As, exclusion from arbitrability is predominantly a matter of case
law, we begin by examining the case law on the subject.
19. In Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc., elucidating on the question of non-
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
9

arbitrability of a dispute, it has been observed:
“35. The Arbitral Tribunals are private fora chosen voluntarily by the parties to the
dispute, to adjudicate their disputes in place of courts and tribunals which are public
fora constituted under the laws of the country. Every civil or commercial dispute,
either contractual or non-contractual, which can be decided by a court, is in principle
capable of being adjudicated and resolved by arbitration unless the jurisdiction of the
Arbitral Tribunals is excluded either expressly or by necessary implication.
Adjudication of certain categories of proceedings are reserved by the legislature
exclusively for public fora as a matter of public policy. Certain other categories of
cases, though not expressly reserved for adjudication by public fora (courts and
tribunals), may by necessary implication stand excluded from the purview of private
fora. Consequently, where the cause/dispute is inarbitrable, the court where a suit is
pending, will refuse to refer the parties to arbitration, under Section 17 Section
34(2)(b)(i) of the Arbitration Act 8 of the Act, even if the parties might have agreed
upon arbitration as the forum for settlement of such disputes.
xx xx xx
37. It may be noticed that the cases referred to above relate to actions in rem. A right
in rem is a right exercisable against the world at large, as contrasted from a right in
personam which is an interest protected solely against specific individuals. Actions in
personam refer to actions determining the rights and interests of the parties
themselves in the subject-
matter of the case, whereas actions in rem refer to actions determining the title to property and the
rights of the parties, not merely among themselves but also against all persons at any time claiming
an interest in that property. Correspondingly, a judgment in personam refers to a judgment against
a person as distinguished from a judgment against a thing, right or status and a judgment in rem
refers to a judgment that determines the status or condition of property which operates directly on
the property itself. (Vide Black’s Law Dictionary.)
38. Generally and traditionally all disputes relating to rights in personam are considered to be
amenable to arbitration; and all disputes relating to rights in rem are required to be adjudicated by
courts and public tribunals, being unsuited for private arbitration. This is not however a rigid or
inflexible rule. Disputes relating to subordinate rights in personam arising from rights in rem have
always been considered to be arbitrable.” Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. states that civil or commercial
dispute, whether contractual or non-contractual, which can be decided by a court, is in principle
capable of being adjudicated and resolved by an arbitral tribunal unless the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal is either expressly or by necessary implication excluded. Legislature is entitled to
exclusively reserve certain category of proceedings for public forums, be it a court or a forum created
or empowered by the State to the exclusion of private forum. Exclusion of the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal are matters of public policy. When public policy mandates and states that a case or
a dispute is non-arbitrable, the court would not allow an application under Section 8 (or even
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
10

Section 11 as observed supra) even if the parties have agreed upon arbitration as the mechanism for
settlement of such disputes.
20. Exclusion or non-arbitrability when clearly expressed would pose no difficulty and should be
respected. However, exclusion or non- arbitrability of subjects or disputes from the purview of a
private forum like arbitration by necessary implication requires setting out the principles that
should be applied.
21. Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. draws a distinction between actions in personam, that is, actions
which determine the rights and interests of parties themselves in the subject matter of the case, and
actions in rem which refer to actions determining the title of the property and the rights of the
parties not merely amongst themselves but also against all the persons at any time claiming an
interest in that property. Rights in personam are considered to be amenable to arbitration and
disputes regarding rights in rem are required to be adjudicated by the courts and public tribunals.
The latter actions are unsuitable for private arbitration. Disputes relating to subordinate rights in
personam arising from rights in rem are considered to be arbitrable. Paragraph 36 of the judgment
in Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. refers to certain examples of non- arbitrable disputes and reads:
“36. The well-recognised examples of non-arbitrable disputes are: (i) disputes
relating to rights and liabilities which give rise to or arise out of criminal offenses; (ii)
matrimonial disputes relating to divorce, judicial separation, restitution of conjugal
rights, child custody; (iii) guardianship matters; (iv) insolvency and winding-up
matters; (v) testamentary matters (grant of probate, letters of administration and
succession certificate); and (vi) eviction or tenancy matters governed by special
statutes where the tenant enjoys statutory protection against eviction and only the
specified courts are conferred jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the disputes.”
22. Landlord-tenant disputes governed by rent control legislation are not actions in rem, yet they
are non-arbitrable. In Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. reference was made to Russell on Arbitration
(22nd Edition) in Para 2.007 at Page 28 wherein the author has observed that certain matters in
English Law are reserved for the court alone and if an arbitral tribunal purports to deal with them
the resulting award would be unenforceable. These matters would include where the type of remedy
required is not one which the arbitral tribunal is empowered to give. Reference was made to Law
and Practice of Commercial Arbitration in England (2nd Ed. 1989) by Mustill and Boyd which states
that certain types of remedies which the arbitrator can award are limited by consideration of public
policy and as arbitrator is appointed by the parties and not by the State. Arbitrator cannot impose
fine, give imprisonment, commit a person for contempt or issue a writ of subpoena nor can he make
an award binding on third parties and affect public at large, such as a judgment in rem. Mustill and
Boyd in their 2001 Companion Volume have observed that axiomatically rights that are valid as
against the whole world, cannot be a subject of private arbitration, although subordinate rights in
personam derived from such rights may be ruled upon by the arbitrators. Therefore, rights under a
patent license may be arbitrated but the validity of the underlying patent may not be arbitrable.
Similarly, an arbitrator who derives its power from a private agreement between A and B, plainly
has no jurisdiction to bind a third person by a decision on whether the patent is valid or not, for no
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
11

one else has mandated him to make the decision and the decision which attempts to do so would be
useless.
23. Analysing provisions of Order XXXIV of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Booz Allen &
Hamilton Inc. holds that this Order not only relates to execution of a decree, it provides for
preliminary and final decrees to satisfy the substantive rights of mortgagees with reference to their
mortgage security. The provisions of Transfer of Property Act read with the Code relating to
mortgage suits makes it clear that all persons having interest either in the mortgage security or in
the right of redemption have to be joined as parties whether they are parties to the mortgage or not.
The object of the provisions is to avoid multiplicity of suits/proceedings and to enable all the
interested persons to raise their defences and claims, which are to be taken note of while dealing
with the claim in the mortgage suit. By passing a preliminary decree or final decree, the court
adjudicates, adjusts and safeguards the interests of not only the mortgager or mortgagee but also
puisne/mesne mortgagees, persons entitled to the equity of redemption, persons having an interest
in the mortgaged property, auction-purchasers and persons in possession, which an arbitral tribunal
cannot do. Therefore, a suit for foreclosure or redemption of mortgage property can be dealt with by
a public forum and not by a private forum.
24. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam and Others,18 referring to the dictum
in Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc., has made two important comments:
“35...This Court held that this class of actions operates in rem, which is a right
exercisable against the world at large as contrasted with a right in personam which is
an interest protected against specified individuals. All disputes relating to rights in
personam are considered to be amenable to arbitration while rights in rem are
required to be adjudicated by courts and public tribunals...
xx xx xx
38. Hence, in addition to various classes of disputes which are generally considered
by the courts as appropriate for decision by public fora, there are classes of disputes
which fall within the exclusive domain of special fora under legislation which confers
exclusive jurisdiction to the exclusion of an ordinarily civil court. That such disputes
are not arbitrable dovetails with the general principle that a dispute which is capable
of adjudication by an ordinary civil court is also capable of being resolved by
arbitration.
However, if the jurisdiction of an ordinary civil court is excluded by the conferment of exclusive
jurisdiction on a specified court or tribunal as a matter of public policy such a dispute would not
then be capable of resolution by arbitration.” 18 (2016) 10 SCC 386
25. In Vimal Kishor Shah disputes relating to private trusts, trustees, and beneficiaries of the trust
and the Trusts Act were held to be non-arbitrable. The Order of Reference explains why disputes
under the Trusts Act are non-arbitrable by necessary implication, for which reference was made to
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
12

few sections of the Trusts Act to demonstrate how the disputes could not be made the subject matter
of arbitration. The reasoning is illustrative and elucidating: -
“27...Under Section 34 of the Indian Trusts Act, a trustee may, without instituting a
suit, apply by petition to a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction for its opinion,
advice, or direction on any present questions respecting management or
administration of trust property, subject to other conditions laid down in the Section.
Obviously, an arbitrator cannot possibly give such opinion, advice, or direction.
Under Section 46, a trustee who has accepted the trust, cannot afterward renounce it,
except, inter alia, with the permission of a principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction. This again cannot be the subject matter of arbitration. Equally, under
Section 49 of the Indian Trusts Act, where a discretionary power conferred on a
trustee is not exercised reasonably and in good faith, only a principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction can control such power, again making it clear that a private
consensual adjudicator has no part in the scheme of this Act. Under Section 53, no
trustee may, without the permission of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction,
buy or become mortgagee or lessee of the trust property or any part thereof. Here
again, such permission can only be given by an arm of the State, namely, the
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. Under Section 74 of the Indian Trusts
Act, under certain circumstances, a beneficiary may apply by petition to a principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction for the appointment of a trustee or a new trustee,
and the Court may appoint such trustee accordingly. Here again, such an
appointment cannot possibly be by a consensual adjudicator. It can only be done by a
petition to a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. Also, it is important to note
that it is not any civil court that has jurisdiction, but only one designated court,
namely, a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. All this goes to show that by
necessary implication, disputes arising under the Indian Trusts Act cannot possibly
be referred to arbitration.”
26. In Emaar MGF Land Limited, the Division Bench referred to the object and the purpose behind
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 as a law that meets the long-felt necessity of protecting the
common man as a consumer against wrongs and misdeeds for which the remedy under the ordinary
law has become illusory as the enforcement machinery does not move, or moves ineffectively or
inefficiently. Thus, to remove helplessness and empower consumers against powerful businesses
and the might of the public bodies, the enactment has constituted consumer forums with extensive
and wide powers to award, wherever appropriate, compensations to the consumers and to impose
penalties for non- compliance with their orders. The Consumer Protection Act has specific
provisions for execution and effective implementation of their orders which powers are far greater
than the power of the ordinary civil court. After referring to the amendments made to Sections 8 and
11 of Arbitration Act by Act No. 3 of 2016, it was observed that the amendments cannot be given
such expansive meaning so as to inundate entire regime of special legislation where such disputes
are not arbitrable. This amendment was not intended to side-line or override the settled law on
non-arbitrability. Reference was made to an earlier decision in Premier Automobiles Ltd. v.
Kamlekar Shantaram Wadke of Bombay and Others19 wherein examining Section 9 of the Code of
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
13

Civil Procedure in the context of rights and remedies under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 it was
observed that the legislature has made provisions for the investigation and settlement of industrial
disputes between unions representing the workmen and the management. The authorities
constituted under the Act have extensive powers in the matter of industrial disputes. Labour Court
and Tribunal can lay down new industrial policy for industrial peace and order, or reinstatement of
dismissed workmen, which no civil court can do. For this, the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act
completely oust 19 (1976) 1 SCC 496 the jurisdiction of the civil court for trial of the industrial
disputes.
The intent of the legislature is to protect the interest of workmen and consumers in larger public
interest in the form of special rights and by constituting a judicial forum with powers that a civil
court or an arbitrator cannot exercise. Neither the workmen nor consumers can waive their right to
approach the statutory judicial forums by opting for arbitration.
27. In Olympus Superstructures Pvt. Ltd., this Court had held that an arbitrator can grant specific
performance as there is no prohibition in the Specific Relief Act, 1963. This decision on the question
of arbitrability has observed, and in our humble opinion rightly, as under:
“34. In our opinion, the view taken by the Punjab, Bombay and Calcutta High Courts
is the correct one and the view taken by the Delhi High Court is not correct. We are of
the view that the right to specific performance of an agreement of sale deals with
contractual rights and it is certainly open to the parties to agree — with a view to
shorten litigation in regular courts — to refer the issues relating to specific
performance to arbitration. There is no prohibition in the Specific Relief Act, 1963
that issues relating to specific performance of a contract relating to immovable
property cannot be referred to arbitration. Nor is there such a prohibition contained
in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 as contrasted with Section 15 of the
English Arbitration Act, 1950 or Section 48(5)(b) of the English Arbitration Act, 1996
which contained a prohibition relating to specific performance of contracts
concerning immovable property.
35. It is stated in Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn., (Arbitration, Vol. 2, para
503) as follows:
“503. Nature of the dispute or difference.—The dispute or difference which the
parties to an arbitration agreement agree to refer must consist of a justiciable issue
triable civilly. A fair test of this is whether the difference can be compromised
lawfully by way of accord and satisfaction (Cf. Bac Abr Arbitrament and Award A).”
28. In V.H. Patel & Company and Others v. Hirubhai Himabhai Patel and Others,20 this Court has
held that in deference to the arbitration clause covering all matters there was no principle of law or
provision that bars an arbitrator from deciding whether the dissolution of a partnership is just and
equitable.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
14

29. Having examined and analysed the judgments, we would coalesce and crystalize the legal
principles for determining non-arbitrability. We begin by drawing principles that draw distinction
between adjudication of actions in rem and adjudication of actions in personam.
30. A judgment is a formal expression of conclusive adjudication of the rights and liabilities of the
parties. The judgment may operate in 20 (2000) 4 SCC 368 two ways, in rem or in personam.
Section 41 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on the question of relevancy of judgments in the context
of conclusiveness of a judgment, order or decree provides:
“41. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.—A final judgment,
order or decree of a competent Court, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial
admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction which confers upon or takes away from any
person any legal character, or which declares any person to be entitled to any such
character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified person
but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character, or the title
of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof— that any legal character, which
it confers accrued at the time when such judgment, order or decree came into
operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued
to that person at the time when such judgment, [order or decree] declares it to have
accrued to that person;
that any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the time
from which such judgment, [order or decree] declared that it had ceased or should
cease;
and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property of
that person at the time from which such judgment, [order or decree] declares that it
had been or should be his property."
A judgment in rem determines the status of a person or thing as distinct from the
particular interest in it of a party to the litigation;
and such a judgment is conclusive evidence for and against all persons whether
parties, privies or strangers of the matter actually decided. Such a judgment “settles
the destiny of the res itself” and binds all persons claiming an interest in the property
inconsistent with the judgment even though pronounced in their absence. 21 By
contrast, a judgment in personam, “although it may concern a res, merely determines
the rights of the litigants inter se to the res”.22 Distinction between judgments in rem
and judgments in personam turns on their power as res judicata,23 i.e. judgment in
rem would operate as res judicata against the world, and judgment in personam
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
15

would operate as res judicata only against the parties in dispute. Use of expressions
“rights in rem” and “rights in personam” may not be correct for determining
non-arbitrability because of the inter-play between rights in rem and rights in
personam. Many a times, a right in rem results in an enforceable right in personam.
Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. refers to the statement by Mustill and Boyd that the
subordinate rights in
21 G.C. Cheshire & P.M. North, Private International Law 12th ed. by North & Fawcett (London:
Butterworth's, 1992, p. 362
22 Ibid 23 G.C. Cheshire & P.M. North, Private International Law 12th ed. by North & Fawcett
(London:
Butterworth's, 1992 personam derived from rights in rem can be ruled upon by the
arbitrators, which is apposite. Therefore, a claim for infringement of copyright
against a particular person is arbitrable, though in some manner the arbitrator would
examine the right to copyright, a right in rem. Arbitration by necessary implication
excludes actions in rem.
31. Exclusion of actions in rem from arbitration, exposits the intrinsic limits of
arbitration as a private dispute resolution mechanism, which is only binding on ‘the
parties’ to the arbitration agreement.
The courts established by law on the other hand enjoy jurisdiction by default and do not require
mutual agreement for conferring jurisdiction. The arbitral tribunals not being courts of law or
established under the auspices of the State cannot act judicially so as to affect those who are not
bound by the arbitration clause. Arbitration is unsuitable when it has erga omnes effect, that is, it
affects the rights and liabilities of persons who are not bound by the arbitration agreement. Equally
arbitration as a decentralized mode of dispute resolution is unsuitable when the subject matter or a
dispute in the factual background, requires collective adjudication before one court or forum.
Certain disputes as a class, or sometimes the dispute in the given facts, can be efficiently resolved
only through collective litigation proceedings. Contractual and consensual nature of arbitration
underpins its ambit and scope. Authority and power being derived from an agreement cannot bind
and is non-effective against non-signatories. An arbitration agreement between two or more parties
would be limpid and inexpedient in situations when the subject matter or dispute affects the rights
and interests of third parties or without presence of others, an effective and enforceable award is not
possible. Prime objective of arbitration to secure just, fair and effective resolution of disputes,
without unnecessary delay and with least expense, is crippled and mutilated when the rights and
liabilities of persons who have not consented to arbitration are affected or the collective resolution
of the disputes by including non-parties is required. Arbitration agreement as an alternative to
public fora should not be enforced when it is futile, ineffective, and would be a no result exercise.24
32. Sovereign functions of the State being inalienable and non-
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
16

delegable are non-arbitrable as the State alone has the exclusive 24 Prof. Stavros Brekoulakis – ‘On
Arbitrability: Persisting Misconceptions and New Areas of Concern’ right and duty to perform such
functions. 25 For example, it is generally accepted that monopoly rights can only be granted by the
State. Correctness and validity of the State or sovereign functions cannot be made a direct subject
matter of a private adjudicatory process. Sovereign functions for the purpose of Arbitration Act
would extend to exercise of executive power in different fields including commerce and economic,
legislation in all forms, taxation, eminent domain and police powers which includes maintenance of
law and order, internal security, grant of pardon etc., as distinguished from commercial activities,
economic adventures and welfare activities.26 Similarly, decisions and adjudicatory functions of the
State that have public interest element like the legitimacy of marriage, citizenship, winding up of
companies, grant of patents, etc. are non-arbitrable, unless the statute in relation to a regulatory or
adjudicatory mechanism either expressly or by clear implication permits arbitration. In these
matters the State enjoys monopoly in dispute resolution.
33. Fourth principle of non-arbitrability is alluded to in the Order of Reference, which makes
specific reference to Vimal Kishor Shah, 25 Ajar Raib – Defining Contours of the Public Policy
Exception – A New Test for Arbitrability 26 Common Cause v. Union of India, (1999) 6 SCC 667 and
Agricultural Produce Market Committee v. Ashok Harikuni & Another, (2000) 8 SCC 61.
which decision quotes from Dhulabhai, a case which dealt with exclusion of jurisdiction of civil
courts under Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code. The second condition in Dhulabhai reads as
under:
“32. (2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of the court, an examination
of the scheme of the particular Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of the
remedies provided may be relevant but is not decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of
the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of the remedies and the scheme
of the particular Act to find out the intendment becomes necessary and the result of
the inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case, it is necessary to see if the statute
creates a special right or a liability and provides for the determination of the right or
liability and further lays down that all questions about the said right and liability
shall be determined by the tribunals so constituted, and whether remedies normally
associated with actions in civil courts are prescribed by the said statute or not.” The
order of reference notes that Dhulabhai refers to three categories mentioned in
Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co. v.
Hawkesford,27 to the following effect:
“There are three classes of cases in which a liability may be established founded upon
a statute. One is, where there was a liability existing at common law, and that liability
is affirmed by a statute which gives a special and peculiar form of remedy different
from the remedy which existed at common law; there, unless the statute contains
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
17

words which expressly or by
27 9 [1859] 6 C.B. (NS) 336 necessary implication exclude the common law remedy, and the party
suing has his election to pursue either that or the statutory remedy. The second class of cases is,
where the statute gives the right to sue merely, but provides no particular form of remedy:
there, the party can only proceed by action at common law. But there is a third class,
viz. where a liability not existing at common law is created by a statute which at the
same time gives a special and particular remedy for enforcing it.” Dhulabhai’s case is
not directly applicable as it relates to exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts, albeit we
respectfully agree with the Order of Reference that the condition No. 2 is apposite
while examining the question of non-arbitrability. Implied legislative intention to
exclude arbitration can be seen if it appears that the statute creates a special right or
a liability and provides for determination of the right and liability to be dealt with by
the specified courts or the tribunals specially constituted in that behalf and further
lays down that all questions about the said right and liability shall be determined by
the court or tribunals so empowered and vested with exclusive jurisdiction.
Therefore, mere creation of a specific forum as a substitute for civil court or
specifying the civil court, may not be enough to accept the inference of implicit non-
arbitrability. Conferment of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of a public
forum though eminently significant, may not be the decisive test to answer and
decide whether arbitrability is impliedly barred.
34. Implicit non-arbitrability is established when by mandatory law the parties are
quintessentially barred from contracting out and waiving the adjudication by the
designated court or the specified public forum. There is no choice. The person who
insists on the remedy must seek his remedy before the forum stated in the statute and
before no other forum. In Transcore v. Union of India and Another,28 this Court had
examined the doctrine of election in the context whether an order under proviso to
Section 19(1) of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions
Act,1993 (the ‘DRT Act’) is a condition precedent to taking recourse to the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 (the ‘NPA Act’). For analysing the scope and remedies under the
two Acts, it was held that NPA Act is an additional remedy which is not inconsistent
with the DRT Act, and reference was made to the doctrine of election in the following
terms:
“64. In the light of the above discussion, we now examine the doctrine of election.
There are three
28 (2008) 1 SCC 125 elements of election, namely, existence of two or more remedies;
inconsistencies between such remedies and a choice of one of them. If anyone of the three elements
is not there, the doctrine will not apply. According to American Jurisprudence, 2d, Vol. 25, p. 652, if
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
18

in truth there is only one remedy, then the doctrine of election does not apply. In the present case,
as stated above, the NPA Act is an additional remedy to the DRT Act. Together they constitute one
remedy and, therefore, the doctrine of election does not apply. Even according to Snell's Principles
of Equity (31st Edn., p. 119), the doctrine of election of remedies is applicable only when there are
two or more co-existent remedies available to the litigants at the time of election which are
repugnant and inconsistent. In any event, there is no repugnancy nor inconsistency between the two
remedies, therefore, the doctrine of election has no application.” Doctrine of election to select
arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism by mutual agreement is available only if the law
accepts existence of arbitration as an alternative remedy and freedom to choose is available. There
should not be any inconsistency or repugnancy between the provisions of the mandatory law and
arbitration as an alternative. Conversely and in a given case when there is repugnancy and
inconsistency, the right of choice and election to arbitrate is denied. This requires examining the
“text of the statute, the legislative history, and ‘inherent conflict’ between arbitration and the
statute’s underlying purpose”29 with reference to the nature and type of special rights 29 Jennifer L.
Peresie, Reducing the Presumption of Arbitrability. conferred and power and authority given to the
courts or public forum to effectuate and enforce these rights and the orders passed. When
arbitration cannot enforce and apply such rights or the award cannot be implemented and enforced
in the manner as provided and mandated by law, the right of election to choose arbitration in
preference to the courts or public forum is either completely denied or could be curtailed. In
essence, it is necessary to examine if the statute creates a special right or liability and provides for
the determination of each right or liability by the specified court or the public forum so constituted,
and whether the remedies beyond the ordinary domain of the civil courts are prescribed. When the
answer is affirmative, arbitration in the absence of special reason is contraindicated. The dispute is
non- arbitrable.
35. In M.D. Frozen Foods Exports Private Limited and Others v.
Hero Fincorp Limited,30 and following this judgment in Indiabulls Housing Finance Limited v.
Deccan Chronicle Holdings Limited and Others,31 it has been held that even prior arbitration
proceedings are not a bar to proceedings under the NPA Act. The 30 (2017) 16 SCC 741 31 (2018) 14
SCC 783 NPA Act sets out an expeditious, procedural methodology enabling the financial
institutions to take possession and sell secured properties for non-payment of the dues. Such
powers, it is obvious, cannot be exercised through the arbitral proceedings.
36. In Transcore, on the powers of the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) under the DRT Act, it was
observed:
“18. On analysing the above provisions of the DRT Act, we find that the said Act is a
complete code by itself as far as recovery of debt is concerned. It provides for various
modes of recovery. It incorporates even the provisions of the Second and Third
Schedules to the Income Tax Act, 1961. Therefore, the debt due under the recovery
certificate can be recovered in various ways. The remedies mentioned therein are
complementary to each other. The DRT Act provides for adjudication. It provides for
adjudication of disputes as far as the debt due is concerned. It covers secured as well
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
19

as unsecured debts. However, it does not rule out the applicability of the provisions
of the TP Act, in particular, Sections 69 and 69-A of that Act. Further, in cases where
the debt is secured by a pledge of shares or immovable properties, with the passage of
time and delay in the DRT proceedings, the value of the pledged assets or mortgaged
properties invariably falls. On account of inflation, the value of the assets in the
hands of the bank/FI invariably depletes which, in turn, leads to asset-liability
mismatch. These contingencies are not taken care of by the DRT Act and, therefore,
Parliament had to enact the NPA Act, 2002.” Consistent with the above, observations
in Transcore on the power of the DRT conferred by the DRT Act and the principle
enunciated in the present judgment, we must overrule the judgment of the Full
Bench of the Delhi High Court in HDFC Bank Ltd. v. Satpal Singh Bakshi,32 which
holds that matters covered under the DRT Act are arbitrable. It is necessary to
overrule this decision and clarify the legal position as the decision in HDFC Bank Ltd.
has been referred to in M.D. Frozen Foods Exports Private Limited, but not examined
in light of the legal principles relating to non-arbitrability. Decision in HDFC Bank
Ltd. holds that only actions in rem are non-arbitrable, which as elucidated above is
the correct legal position. However, non-arbitrability may arise in case the implicit
prohibition in the statute, conferring and creating special rights to be adjudicated by
the courts/public fora, which right including enforcement of order/provisions cannot
be enforced and applied in case of arbitration. To hold that the claims of banks and
financial institutions covered under the DRT Act are arbitrable would deprive and
deny these institutions of the specific rights including the modes of recovery specified
in the DRT Act.
Therefore, the claims covered by the DRT Act are non-arbitrable as there is a
prohibition against waiver of jurisdiction of the DRT by necessary implication. The
legislation has overwritten the contractual right to arbitration.
32 2013 (134) DRJ 566 (FB)
37. In Natraj Studios (P) Ltd., a case under the Arbitration Act,1940, it was observed that on broader
consideration of public policy the disputes were non-arbitrable. In N. Radhakrishnan v. Maestro
Engineers and Others,33 reliance was placed on the following observations in Abdul Kadir
Samshuddin Bubere v. Madhav Prabharkar Oak and Another:34 “There is no doubt that when a
serious allegation of fraud is laid against the party and the party who charged with the fraud desires
that the matter should be tried in the open court it would be sufficient cause for the court for the
court not to order an arbitration agreement to be filed and not to make the reference.” N.
Radhakrishnan upheld the order rejecting the application under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act on
the ground that it would be in furtherance of justice that the allegations as to fraud and
manipulation of finances in the partnership firm are tried in the court of law which is more
competent and has means to decide a complicated matter. However, in A. Ayyasamy,
notwithstanding the allegations of fraud, the civil appeal was allowed, the civil suit was stayed and
reference to arbitration under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act was made. A.K. Sikri J. held that the
Arbitration Act does not make any specific provision for excluding any category of 33 (2010) 1 SCC
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
20

72 34 AIR 1962 SC 406 disputes terming them as non-arbitrable but there are a number of
pronouncements which hold that fraud is one such category where the dispute would be considered
as non-arbitrable. Elucidating on the exclusion, he observed that pleading of a mere allegation of
fraud by one party is not enough. The allegation of fraud should be such which makes a virtual case
of a criminal offence. On the question of non-arbitrability when there are allegations of fraud, he
observed:
“25... finds that there are very serious allegations of fraud which make a virtual case
of criminal offense or where allegations of fraud are so complicated that it becomes
absolutely essential that such complex issues can be decided only by the civil court on
the appreciation of the voluminous evidence that needs to be produced, the court can
sidetrack the agreement by dismissing the application under Section 8 and proceed
with the suit on merits. It can be so done also in those cases where there are serious
allegations of forgery/fabrication of documents in support of the plea of fraud or
where fraud is alleged against the arbitration provision itself or is of such a nature
that permeates the entire contract, including the agreement to arbitrate, meaning
thereby in those cases where fraud goes to the validity of the contract itself of the
entire contract which contains the arbitration clause or the validity of the arbitration
clause itself...Such categories of non-arbitrable subjects are carved out by the courts,
keeping in mind the principle of common law that certain disputes which are of
public nature, etc. are not capable of adjudication and settlement by arbitration and
for resolution of such disputes, courts i.e. public fora, are better suited than a private
forum of arbitration...” D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in his concurring judgment unclasped
the mandatory nature of Section 8 of the Arbitration Act to observe that allegations of
fraud can be made a subject matter of arbitration by relying on Russell on
Arbitration, Redfer Hunter on International Arbitration and Gary B. Born in
International Commercial Arbitration. Reliance was placed on the principle of
separation and legal effect of the doctrine of competence-
competence, to observe:
“13. Once an application in due compliance with Section 8 of the Arbitration Act is
filed, the approach of the civil court should be not to see whether the court has
jurisdiction. It should be to see whether its jurisdiction has been ousted. There is a lot
of difference between the two approaches. Once it is brought to the notice of the court
that its jurisdiction has been taken away in terms of the procedure prescribed under a
special statute, the civil court should first see whether there is ouster of jurisdiction in
terms or compliance with the procedure under the special statute. The general law
should yield to the special law — generalia specialibus non derogant. In such a
situation, the approach shall not be to see whether there is still jurisdiction in the
civil court under the general law. Such approaches would only delay the resolution of
disputes and complicate the redressal of grievance and of course unnecessarily
increase the pendency in the court.” xx xx xx
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
21

43. Hence, the allegations of criminal wrongdoing or of statutory violation would not
detract from the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal to resolve a dispute arising out
of a civil or contractual relationship on the basis of the jurisdiction conferred by the
arbitration agreement.” Elucidating and summarising the legal position,
D.Y.Chandrachud J. has observed:
“53. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, should in my view be interpreted so
as to bring in line the principles underlying its interpretation in a manner that is
consistent with prevailing approaches in the common law world. Jurisprudence in
India must evolve towards strengthening the institutional efficacy of arbitration.
Deference to a forum chosen by parties as a complete remedy for resolving all their
claims is but part of that evolution. Minimising the intervention of courts is again a
recognition of the same principle.”
38. Arbitrability as noticed above in essence is a matter of national policy.35 A
statute, on the basis of public policy, can expressly or by implication restrict or
prohibit arbitrability of disputes. To this extent there is uniformity and consensus.
However, N. Radhakrishnan while accepting that the dispute may be arbitrable under
the applicable mandatory law, holds that the dispute would be non-arbitrable on
public policy consideration if it relates to serious allegations of fraud. The two views
in A. Ayyasamy exposit the predicament on the role of public policy in deciding the
question of law of non-arbitrability. Whether a subject matter or a dispute should be
held as non-arbitrable on public policy is vexed
35 A Second Look at Arbitrability: Approaches to Arbitration in the United States, Switzerland and
Germany by Patrick M. Baron and Stefan Liniger and not free from difficulty as reflected in the
strong opinions expressed in the judgments. Indeed, under the Arbitration Act, 1940, the case law in
view of the statutory discretion under sub- section (4) to Sections 20 and 34 clearly supports and
accepts the role and relevance of public policy. Legal position under the Arbitration Act as examined
under the heading ‘Who decides non- arbitrability’, however, is different.
39. We begin by examining sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b) to Sub-section (2) to Section 34,
which read as under:
“34. Application for setting aside arbitral award. – xx xx xx (2) An arbitral award may
be set aside by the Court only if –
(a) ...
(b) the Court finds that––
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under
the law for the time being in fore, or
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
22

(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.
Explanation 1. ––For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the
public policy of India, only if, ––
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of
section 75 or section 81; or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2. ––For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.” Section
34(2)(b) consists of two sub-clauses both accrediting the court with the power to set aside an award.
Under sub-clause
(i) an award is liable to be set aside when the subject matter is not capable of settlement by
arbitration under law for the time being in force. Under sub-clause (ii) an award can be set aside if it
is in conflict with the public policy of India. As per Explanation No. 1, an award is in conflict with the
public policy of India only if it was induced or affected by fraud, corruption, etc. or it is in
contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law or is in conflict with the most basic notions
of morality or justice. Explanation 2 cautions the courts not to review on the merits of the case while
examining the question whether an award is in contravention with the fundamental policy of law.
Therefore, conflict with the public policy of India and a subject matter of dispute not capable of
settlement by arbitration, are two separate and independent grounds on which the court can set
aside the award. Reference to public policy in Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. and in the present matter
and non-arbitrability of the subject matter is completely different and has nothing in common with
the public policy of India referred to in sub-clause (ii) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act.
Public policy in the context of non-arbitrability refers to public policy as reflected in the enactment,
that is, whether the enactment confers exclusive jurisdiction to the specified court or the special
forum and prohibits recourse to arbitration. Public policy in the context of sub-clause(ii) to Section
34(2)(b) refers to the public policy of the enactment, defining and fixing rights and obligations, and
application of those rights and obligations by the arbitrator. Statutes unfailingly have a public
purpose or policy which is the basis and purpose behind the legislation. Application of mandatory
law to the merits of the case do not imply that the right to arbitrate is taken away. Mandatory law
may require a particular substantive rule to be applied, but this would not preclude arbitration.
Implied non-arbitrability requires prohibition against waiver of jurisdiction, which happens when a
statute gives special rights or obligations and creates or stipulates an exclusive forum for
adjudication and enforcement. An arbitrator, like the court, is equally bound by the public policy
behind the statute while examining the claim on merits. The public policy in case of
non-arbitrability would relate to conferment of exclusive jurisdiction on the court or the special
forum set up by law for decision making. Non-arbitrability question cannot be answered by
examining whether the statute has a public policy objective which invariably every statue would
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
23

have. There is a general presumption in favour of arbitrability, which is not excluded simply because
the dispute is permeated by applicability of mandatory law. Violation of public policy by the
arbitrator could well result in setting aside the award on the ground of failure to follow the
fundamental policy of law in India, but not on the ground that the subject matter of the dispute was
non-arbitrable.
40. However, the above discussion would not be a complete answer to N. Radhakrishnan that if
justice demands, then notwithstanding the arbitration clause, the dispute would be tried in the open
court. To accept this reasoning one would have to agree that arbitration is a flawed and
compromised dispute resolution mechanism that can be forgone when public interest or public
policy demands the dispute should be tried and decided in the court of law. The public policy
argument proceeds on the foundation and principle that arbitration is inferior to court adjudication
as: (i) fact finding process in arbitration is not equivalent to judicial fact finding, which is far more
comprehensive and in-depth; (ii) there is limited or lack of reasoning in awards; (iii) arbitrators
enjoy and exercise extensive and unhindered powers and therefore are prone in making arbitrary
and despotic decisions; (iv) there is no appeal process in arbitration which combined with the (iii)
above and limited review of an arbitral award in post-award court proceedings, arbitration may have
devastating consequences for the losing party and undermines justice; (v) arbitration proceedings
are usually private and confidential; (vi) arbitrators are unfit to address issues arising out of the
economic power disparity or social concerns; 36 (vii) business and industry, by adopting and
compulsorily applying arbitration process, leave the vulnerable and weaker sections with little or no
meaningful choice but to accept arbitration. A few people realize and understand the importance of
loss of their right to access the court of law or public forum, which are impartial, just 36 (i) to (vi)
from Prof. Stavros Brekoulakis – On Arbitrability: Persisting Misconceptions and New Area of
Concern.
and fair;37 and (viii) arbitration is expensive and costly in comparison to court adjudication.38
41. While it would not be correct to dispel the grounds as mere conjectures and baseless, it would be
grossly irrational and completely wrong to mistrust and treat arbitration as flawed and inferior
adjudication procedure unfit to deal with the public policy aspects of a legislation. Arbitrators, like
the courts, are equally bound to resolve and decide disputes in accordance with the public policy of
the law. Possibility of failure to abide by public policy consideration in a legislation, which otherwise
does not expressly or by necessary implication exclude arbitration, cannot form the basis to
overwrite and nullify the arbitration agreement. This would be contrary to and defeat the legislative
intent reflected in the public policy objective behind the Arbitration Act. Arbitration has
considerable advantages as it gives freedom to the parties to choose an arbitrator of their choice, and
it is informal, flexible and quick. Simplicity, informality and expedition are hallmarks of arbitration.
Arbitrators are required to be impartial and independent, adhere to natural justice, and follow a fair
and just 37 (vii) from the preamble of the text of the bill of 2007 Arbitration Fairness Act as was
written by the sponsor and submitted to the House for consideration 38 Union of India v. Singh
Builders Syndicate, (2009) 4 SCC 523. procedure. Arbitrators are normally experts in the subject
and perform their tasks by referring to facts, evidence, and relevant case law. Complexity is not
sufficient to ward off arbitration. In terms of the mandate of Section 89 of the Civil Procedure Code
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
24

and the object and purpose behind the Arbitration Act and the mandatory language of Sections 8
and 11, the mutually agreed arbitration clauses must be enforced. The language of Sections 8 and 11
of the Arbitration Act are peremptory in nature. Arbitration Act has been enacted to promote
arbitration as a transparent, fair, and just alternative to court adjudication. Public policy is to
encourage and strengthen arbitration to resolve and settle economic, commercial and civil disputes.
Amendments from time to time have addressed the issues and corrected the inadequacies and flaws
in the arbitration procedure. It is for the stakeholders, including the arbitrators, to assure that the
arbitration is as impartial, just, and fair as court adjudication. It is also the duty of the courts at the
post-award stage to selectively yet effectively exercise the limited jurisdiction, within the four
corners of Section 34(2)(b)(ii) read with Explanation 1 and 2 and check any conflict with the
fundamental policy of the applicable law. We would subsequently refer to the ‘second look’ 39
principle which is applicable in three specific situations dealing with arbitrability as per the mandate
of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.
42. Recently, the Supreme Court of Canada in TELUS Communications Inc. v. Avraham
Wellman,40 while conceding that arbitration as a method of dispute resolution was met with “overt
hostility” for a long time on public policy grounds as it ousts jurisdiction of courts, observed that the
new legislation, the Arbitration Act of 1991, marks a departure as it encourages parties to adopt
arbitration in commercial and other matters. By putting party autonomy on a high pedestal, the Act
mandates that the parties to a valid arbitration agreement must abide by the consensual and agreed
mode of dispute resolution. The courts must show due respect to arbitration agreements particularly
in commercial settings by staying the court proceedings, unless the legislative language is to the
contrary. The principle of party autonomy goes hand in hand with the principle of limited court
intervention, this being the fundamental principle underlying modern arbitration law. Party
autonomy is weaker in non- 39 Mitsubishi Motors Corp v. Soler Chrysler Plymouth Inc, 473 U.S. 614
S Ct 3346 (1985) (U.S. Supreme Court, 2 July 1985) 40 (2019) SCC 19 (CanLII) negotiated “take it or
leave it” contracts and, therefore, the legislature can through statutes shield the weakest and
vulnerable contracting parties like consumers. This is not so in negotiated agreements or even in
adhesion contracts having an arbitration clause in commercial settings. Virtues of commercial and
civil arbitration have been recognised and accepted and the courts even encourage the use of
arbitration.
43. A recent judgment of this Court in Avitel Post Studioz Limited and Others v. HSBC PI Holdings
(Mauritius) Limited 41 has examined the law on invocation of ‘fraud exception’ in great detail and
holds that N. Radhakrishnan as a precedent has no legs to stand on. We respectfully concur with the
said view and also the observations made in paragraph 14 of the judgment in Avitel Post Studioz
Limited, which quotes observations in Rashid Raza v. Sadaf Akhthar42:
“4. The principles of law laid down in this appeal make a distinction between serious
allegations of forgery/ fabrication in support of the plea of fraud as opposed to
“simple allegations”. Two working tests laid down in para 25 are: (1) does this plea
permeate the entire contract and above all, the agreement of arbitration, rendering it
void, or (2) whether the allegations of fraud touch upon the internal affairs of the
parties inter se having no implication in the public domain.” 41 Civil Appeal No. 5145
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
25

of 2016 and connected matters, decided on 19.08.2020 42 (2019) 8 SCC 710 to
observe in Avitel Post Studioz Limited:
“it is clear that serious allegations of fraud arise only if either of the two tests laid
down are satisfied and not otherwise. The first test is satisfied only when it can be
said that the arbitration clause or agreement itself cannot be said to exist in a clear
case in which the court finds that the party against whom breach is alleged cannot be
said to have entered into the agreement relating to arbitration at all. The second test
can be said to have been met in cases in which allegations are made against the State
or its instrumentalities of arbitrary, fraudulent, or mala fide conduct, thus,
necessitating the hearing of the case by a writ court in which questions are raised
which are not predominantly questions arising from the contract itself or breach
thereof but questions arising in the public law domain.” The judgment in Avitel Post
Studioz Limited interprets Section 17 of the Contract Act to hold that Section 17
would apply if the contract itself is obtained by fraud or cheating. Thereby, a
distinction is made between a contract obtained by fraud, and post-
contract fraud and cheating. The latter would fall outside Section 17 of the Contract
Act and, therefore, the remedy for damages would be available and not the remedy
for treating the contract itself as void.
44. In Deccan Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. Regency Mahavir Properties43, legal proceedings for
cancellation of documents 43 Civil Appeal No. 5147 of 2016, decided on 19.08.2020 under Section
31 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 were held to be actions in personam and not actions in rem.
Significantly, the judgment refers to the definition of action in rem by R.H. Graveson (Conflict of
Laws 98, 7th ed. 1974), which reads as under:
“An action in rem is one in which the judgment of the Court determines the title to
property and the rights of the parties, not merely as between themselves, but also as
against all persons at any time dealing with them or with the property upon which the
Court had adjudicated.”
45. In view of the above discussion, we would like to propound a four-
fold test for determining when the subject matter of a dispute in an arbitration agreement is not
arbitrable:
(1) when cause of action and subject matter of the dispute relates to actions in rem,
that do not pertain to subordinate rights in personam that arise from rights in rem.
(2) when cause of action and subject matter of the dispute affects third party rights;
have erga omnes effect; require centralized adjudication, and mutual adjudication
would not be appropriate and enforceable;
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
26

(3) when cause of action and subject matter of the dispute relates to inalienable
sovereign and public interest functions of the State and hence mutual adjudication
would be unenforceable; and (4) when the subject-matter of the dispute is expressly
or by necessary implication non-arbitrable as per mandatory statute(s).
These tests are not watertight compartments; they dovetail and overlap, albeit when applied
holistically and pragmatically will help and assist in determining and ascertaining with great degree
of certainty when as per law in India, a dispute or subject matter is non-arbitrable. Only when the
answer is affirmative that the subject matter of the dispute would be non-arbitrable.
However, the aforesaid principles have to be applied with care and caution as observed in Olympus
Superstructures Pvt. Ltd.:
“35...Reference is made there to certain disputes like criminal offences of a public
nature, disputes arising out of illegal agreements and disputes relating to status, such
as divorce, which cannot be referred to arbitration. It has, however, been held that if
in respect of fats relating to a criminal matter, say, physical injury, if there is a right
to damages for personal injury, then such a dispute can be referred to arbitration
(Keir v. Leeman). Similarly, it has been held that a husband and a wife may refer to
arbitration the terms on which they shall separate, because they can make a valid
agreement between themselves on that matter (Soilleux v. Herbst, Wilson v. Wilson
and Cahill v. Cahill).”
46. Applying the above principles to determine non-arbitrability, it is apparent that
insolvency or intracompany disputes have to be addressed by a centralized forum, be
the court or a special forum, which would be more efficient and has complete
jurisdiction to efficaciously and fully dispose of the entire matter. They are also
actions in rem. Similarly, grant and issue of patents and registration of trademarks
are exclusive matters falling within the sovereign or government functions and have
erga omnes effect.
Such grants confer monopoly rights. They are non-arbitrable. Criminal cases again are not
arbitrable as they relate to sovereign functions of the State. Further, violations of criminal law are
offenses against the State and not just against the victim. Matrimonial disputes relating to the
dissolution of marriage, restitution of conjugal rights etc. are not arbitrable as they fall within the
ambit of sovereign functions and do not have any commercial and economic value. The decisions
have erga omnes effect. Matters relating to probate, testamentary matter etc. are actions in rem and
are a declaration to the world at large and hence are non-arbitrable.
47. In view of the aforesaid discussions, we overrule the ratio in N. Radhakrishnan inter alia
observing that allegations of fraud can be made a subject matter of arbitration when they relate to a
civil dispute. This is subject to the caveat that fraud, which would vitiate and invalidate the
arbitration clause, is an aspect relating to non- arbitrability. We have also set aside the Full Bench
decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of HDFC Bank Ltd. which holds that the disputes which
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
27

are to be adjudicated by the DRT under the DRT Act are arbitrable. They are non-arbitrable.
48. Landlord-tenant disputes governed by the Transfer of Property Act are arbitrable as they are not
actions in rem but pertain to subordinate rights in personam that arise from rights in rem. Such
actions normally would not affect third-party rights or have erga omnes affect or require centralized
adjudication. An award passed deciding landlord-tenant disputes can be executed and enforced like
a decree of the civil court. Landlord-tenant disputes do not relate to inalienable and sovereign
functions of the State. The provisions of the Transfer of Property Act do not expressly or by
necessary implication bar arbitration. Transfer of Property Act, like all other Acts, has a public
purpose, that is, to regulate landlord- tenant relationships and the arbitrator would be bound by the
provisions, including provisions which enure and protect the tenants.
49. In view of the aforesaid, we overrule the ratio laid down in Himangni Enterprises and hold that
landlord-tenant disputes are arbitrable as the Transfer of Property Act does not forbid or foreclose
arbitration. However, landlord-tenant disputes covered and governed by rent control legislation
would not be arbitrable when specific court or forum has been given exclusive jurisdiction to apply
and decide special rights and obligations. Such rights and obligations can only be adjudicated and
enforced by the specified court/forum, and not through arbitration.
Who decides non-arbitrability?
50. Lord Mustill’s well-known comparison of the relationship between courts and arbitrators to a
relay race, reads:
“Ideally, the handling of arbitrable disputes should resemble a relay race. In the
initial stages, before the arbitrators are seized of the dispute, the baton is in the grasp
of the court; for at that stage there is no other organisation which could take steps to
prevent the arbitration agreement for being ineffectual. When the arbitrators take
charge they take over the baton and retain it until they have made an award. At this
point, having no longer a function to fill, the arbitrators hand back the baton so that
the court can in case of need lend its coercive powers to the enforcement of the
award.” Thus, the legal problem of allocation of decision-making authority between
courts and arbitral tribunals.
51. Issue of non-arbitrability can be raised at three stages. First, before the court on an application
for reference under Section 11 or for stay of pending judicial proceedings and reference under
Section 8 of the Arbitration Act; secondly, before the arbitral tribunal during the course of the
arbitration proceedings; or thirdly, before the court at the stage of the challenge to the award or its
enforcement. Therefore, the question – ‘Who decides non- arbitrability?’ and, in particular, the
jurisdiction of the court at the first look stage, that is, the referral stage.
52. Who decides the question of non-arbitrability? - a jurisdictional question is a technical legal
issue, and requires clarity when applied to facts to avoid bootstrapping and confusion. The doubt as
to who has the jurisdiction to decide could hinder, stray, and delay a many arbitration proceedings.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
28

Unfortunately, who decides non-arbitrability remains a vexed question that does not have a
straightforward universal answer as would be apparent from opinions in the at-variance Indian case
laws on this subject. To some extent, the answer depends on how much jurisdiction the enactment
gives to the arbitrator to decide their own jurisdiction as well as the court’s jurisdiction at the
reference stage and in the post-award proceedings. It also depends upon the jurisdiction bestowed
by the enactment, viz. the facet of non-arbitrability in question, the scope of the arbitration
agreement and authority conferred on the arbitrator.
53. Under the Arbitration Act, 1940, the jurisdiction to settle and decide non-arbitrability issues
relating to existence, validity, scope as well as whether the subject matter was capable of arbitration,
with possible exception in case of termination, novation, frustration and ‘accord and satisfaction’
when contested on facts, was determined and decided at the first or at the reference stage by the
courts. The principle being that the court should be satisfied about the existence of a valid
arbitration agreement and that the disputes have arisen with regard to the subject matter of the
arbitration agreement. At this stage, the court would be, however, not concerned with the merits or
sustainability of the disputes. Despite best efforts to contain obstructive tactics, adjudication and
final decision of non-arbitrability issues at the reference stage would invariably stop, derail and
thwart the proceedings in the courts for years.
54. The Arbitration Act based upon the UNCITRAL Model Law introduced an entirely new regimen
with the objective to promote arbitration in commercial and economic matters as an alternative
dispute resolution mechanism that is fair, responsive and efficient to contemporary requirements.
One of the primary objectives of the Arbitration Act is to reduce and minimize the supervisory role
of courts. Accordingly, the statutory powers of the arbitral tribunal to deal with and decide
jurisdictional issues of non-arbitrability were amplified and the principles of separation and
competence- competence were incorporated, while the courts retained some power to have a ‘second
look’ in the post-award challenge proceeding. On the jurisdiction of the court at the referral stage,
views of this Court have differed and there have been statutory amendments to modify and
obliterate the legal effect of the court decisions.
55. The legal position as to who decides the question of non-
arbitrability under the Arbitration Act can be divided into four phases. The first phase was from the
enforcement of the Arbitration Act till the decision of the Constitution Bench of seven Judges in
Patel Engineering Ltd. on 26th October 2005. For nearly ten years, the ratio expressed in Konkan
Railway Corpn. Ltd. and Others v. Mehul Construction Co.,44 affirmed by the 44 (2000) 7 SCC 201
Constitution Bench of five Judges in Konkan Railway Construction Ltd. and Another v. Rani
Construction Pvt. Ltd.,45 had prevailed. The second phase commenced with the decision in Patel
Engineering Ltd. till the legislative amendments, which were made to substantially reduce court
interference and overrule the legal effect of Patel Engineering Ltd. vide Act 3 of 2016 with
retrospective effect from 23rd October 2015. The third phase commenced with effect from 23rd
October 2015 and continued till the enactment of Act 33 of 2019 with effect from 9 th August 2019,
from where commenced the fourth phase, with a clear intent to promote institutionalized arbitration
rather than ad hoc arbitration. The amendments introduced by Act 33 of 2019 have been partially
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
29

implemented and enforced. In the present case, we are primarily concerned with the legal position
in the third phase with effect from 23rd October 2015 when amendments by Act 3 of 2016 became
operative.
56. We begin by reproducing the relevant statutory provisions, namely, Sections 8, 11, 16,
sub-sections (1) and (2) to Section 34 including clause (b), which has been partly quoted in
paragraph 39 above, and sub-sections (1), (2), (3) to Section 43 of the Arbitration Act. 45 (2002) 2
SCC 388 For the sake of clarity and convenience, we are reproducing below the provisions of
Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act in a tabulated form as Sections 8 and 11 were amended by
Act 3 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 23rd October, 2015 and Section 11 has undergone
another amendment vide Act 33 of 2019 with effect from 9th August, 2019.
Section 8, pre and post Act 3 of 2016, read as under:
                  SECTION 8                                         SECTION 8
             (before Act 3 of 2016)                             (post Act 3 of 2016)
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where     8. Power to refer parties to arbitrat
there is an arbitration agreement. —               where there is an arbitration agreeme
                                                   —
(1) A judicial authority before which an action is (1) A judicial authority, before which an brought in
a matter which is the subject of an action is brought in a matter which is the arbitration agreement
shall, if a party so applies subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if not later than when
submitting his first statement a party to the arbitration agreement or any on the substance of the
dispute, refer the parties person claiming through or under him, so to arbitration. applies not later
than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, then,
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any court, refer the parties
to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists.] (2) The
application referred to in sub-section (1) (2) The application referred to in sub- shall not be
entertained unless it is accompanied section (1) shall not be entertained unless by the original
arbitration agreement or a duly it is accompanied by the original arbitration certified copy thereof.
agreement or a duly certified copy thereof.
[Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available
with the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub-section (1), and the said agreement or
certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file
such application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to
call upon the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy
before that Court.] (3) Notwithstanding that an application has been (3) Notwithstanding that an
application has made under sub-section (1) and that the issue is been made under sub-section (1)
and that pending before the judicial authority, an arbitration the issue is pending before the judicial
may be commenced or continued and an arbitral authority, an arbitration may be award made.
commenced or continued and an arbitral award made.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
30

xx xx xx Section 11, pre and post amendments vide Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, reads as under:
          SECTION 11                          SECTION 11                          SECTIO
    (before Act 3 of 2016)                (post Act 3 of 2016)               (post Act 3
11.       Appointment          of   11.       Appointment          of   11.       Appoin
arbitrators. –                      arbitrators. –                      arbitrators. —
(1) A person of any nationality     (1) A person of any nationality     (1) A person of 
may be an arbitrator, unless        may be an arbitrator, unless        may be an arbitr
otherwise agreed by the             otherwise agreed by the             otherwise agreed
parties.                            parties.                            parties.
(2) Subject to sub-section (6),     (2) Subject to sub-section (6),     (2) Subject to s
the parties are free to agree       the parties are free to agree       the parties are 
on a procedure for appointing       on a procedure for appointing       on a procedure f
the arbitrator or arbitrators.      the arbitrator or arbitrators.      the arbitrator o
(3) Failing any agreement           (3) Failing any agreement           (3) Failing any 
referred to in sub-section (2),     referred to in sub-section (2),     referred to in s
in an arbitration with three        in an arbitration with three        in an arbitratio
arbitrators, each party shall       arbitrations, each party shall      arbitrators, eac
appoint one arbitrator, and the     appoint one arbitrator, and the     appoint one arbi
two appointed arbitrators shall     two appointed arbitrators shall
appoint the third arbitrator appoint the third arbitrator two appointed arbitrators shall who shall act
as the presiding who shall act as the presiding appoint the third arbitrator arbitrator. arbitrator. who
shall act as the presiding arbitrator.
(3-A) The Supreme Court and the High Court shall have the power to designate, arbitral institutions,
from time to time, which have been graded by the Council under Section 43- I, for the purposes of
this Act:
Provided that in respect of those High Court jurisdictions, where no graded arbitral
institution are available, then, the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may
maintain a panel of arbitrators for discharging the functions and duties of arbitral
institution and any reference to the arbitrator shall be deemed to be an arbitral
institution for the purposes of this section and the arbitrator appointed by a party
shall be entitled to such fee at the rate as specified in the Fourth Schedule:
Provided further that the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court may, from time
to time, review the panel of arbitrators.] (4) If the appointment (4) If the
appointment (4) If [the appointment shall procedure in sub-section (3) procedure in
sub-section (3) be made, on an application of applies and–– applies and –– the
party, by the arbitral
(a) a party fails to appoint an (a) a party fails to appoint an institution designated by
the arbitrator within thirty days arbitrator within thirty days Supreme Court, in case
of from the receipt of a request from the receipt of a request international commercial
to do so from the other party; to do so from the other party; arbitration, or by the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
31

High or or Court, in case of arbitrations
(b) the two appointed (b) the two appointed other than international arbitrators fail
to agree on the arbitrators fail to agree on the commercial arbitration, as the third
arbitrator within thirty third arbitrator within thirty case may be].
days from the date of their days from the date of their appointment, the appointment appointment,
the appointment shall be made, upon request shall be made, upon request of a party, by the Chief
Justice of a party, by the Supreme or any person or institution Court or, as the case may be,
designated by him. the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court.
(5) Failing any agreement (5) Failing any agreement (5) Failing any agreement referred to in
sub-section (2), referred to in sub-section (2), in an arbitration with a sole in an arbitration with a
sole referred to in sub-section (2), arbitrator, if the parties fail to arbitrator, if the parties fail to in an
arbitration with a sole agree on the arbitrator within agree on the arbitrator within arbitrator, if the
parties fail to thirty days from receipt of a thirty days from receipt of a agree on the arbitrator within
request by one party from the request by one party from the thirty days from receipt of a other party
to so agree the other party to so agree the request by one party from the appointment shall be made,
appointment shall be made, other party to so agree [the upon request of a party, by upon request of
a party, by appointment shall be made on the Chief Justice or any the Supreme Court or, as the an
application of the party in person or institution case may be, the High Court accordance with the
designated by him. or any person or institution provisions contained in sub-
designated by such Court. section (4)].
(6) Where, under an (6) Where, under an (6) Where, under an appointment procedure appointment
procedure appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,–– agreed upon by the parties,––
agreed upon by the parties,—
(a) a party fails to act as (a) a party fails to act as (a) a party fails to act as required under that
required under that required under that procedure; or procedure; or procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two (b) the parties, or the two
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to appointed arbitrators, fail to appointed
arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement expected reach an agreement expected reach an agreement
expected of them under that procedure; of them under that procedure;
of them under that procedure;
or                                   or
                                                                          or
(c) a person, including an           (c) a person, including an
institution, fails to perform any    institution, fails to perform any    (c) a person, 
function entrusted to him or it      function entrusted to him or it      institution, f
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
32

under that procedure, a party        under that procedure, a party        function entru
may request the Chief Justice        may request the Supreme              under that pro
or any person or institution         Court or, as the case may be,        appointment sh
designated by him to take the        the High Court or any person         on an applicat
necessary measure, unless            or institution designated by         by the arbitra
the     agreement        on    the   such Court to take the               designated by 
appointment             procedure    necessary measure, unless            Court, in case
provides other means for             the     agreement        on    the   commercial arb
securing the appointment.            appointment             procedure    the High Court
                                     provides other means for             arbitrations  
                                     securing the appointment.            international 
                                                                          arbitration, a
                                                                          be] to take th
                                                                          measure,      
                                                                          agreement     
                                                                          appointment   
                                                                          provides other
                                                                          securing the a
                                     (6-A) The Supreme Court or, (6-A) [* * *]
                                     as the case may be, the High
                                     Court, while considering any
                                     application under sub-section
                                     (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-
               NA                    section         (6),     shall,
                                     notwithstanding            any
                                     judgment, decree or order of
                                     any Court, confine to the
                                     examination of the existence
                                     of an arbitration agreement.
                                      (6B) The designation of any         (6-B) The des
                                      person or institution by the        person or inst
                                      Supreme Court or, as the            Supreme Court 
                                      case may be, the High Court,        case may be, t
                                      for the purposes of this            for the purpos
               NA                     section shall not be regarded       section shall 
                                      as a delegation of judicial         as a delegatio
                                      power by the Supreme Court          power by the S
                                      or the High Court.                  or the High co
(7) A decision on a matter            (7) A decision on a matter          (7) [* * *]
entrusted by sub-section (4)          entrusted by sub-section (4)
or sub-section (5) or sub-            or sub-section (5) or sub-
section (6) to the Chief Justice      section (6) to the Supreme
or the person or institution          Court or, as the case may be,
designated by him is final.           the High Court or the person
                                      or institution designated by
                                      such Court is final and no
                                      appeal      including    Letters
                                      Patent Appeal shall lie against
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
33

                                      such decision.
(8) The Chief Justice or the          (8) The Supreme Court or, as        (8) [The arbit
person       or        institution    the case may be, the High           referred to in
designated      by     him,      in   Court or the person or              (5) and (6)], 
appointing an arbitrator, shall       institution designated by such      an arbitrator,
have due regard to––                  Court, before appointing an         disclosure in 
(a) any qualifications required       arbitrator,   shall   seek     a    prospective ar
of the arbitrator by the              disclosure in writing from the      of sub-section
agreement of the parties; and         prospective arbitrator in terms     12, and have d
(b) other considerations as           of sub-section (1) of section       (a) any qualif
are likely to secure the              12, and have due regard to––        for the arbitr
appointment         of        any     (a) any qualifications required     agreement of t
independent and impartial             for the arbitrator by the
                                                                          (b) the conten
arbitrator.                           agreement of the parties; and
                                                                          disclosure    
                                      (b) the contents of the
                                                                          considerations
                                      disclosure       and       other
                                                                          secure the app
                                      considerations as are likely to
                                                                          independent an
                                      secure the appointment of an
                                                                          arbitrator.]
                                      independent and impartial
                                      arbitrator.
(9) In the case of appointment        (9) In the case of appointment      (9) In the cas
of sole or third arbitrator in an     of sole or third arbitrator in an   of sole or thi
international         commercial      international        commercial     international 
arbitration, the Chief Justice        arbitration, the Supreme Court      arbitration,  
of India or the person or             or the person or institution        institution de
institution designated by him         designated by that Court may        Supreme Court]
may appoint an arbitrator of a        appoint an arbitrator of a          an arbitrator 
nationality other than the            nationality other than the          other than the
nationalities of the parties          nationalities of the parties        the parties wh
where the parties belong to           where the parties belong to         belong        
different nationalities.              different nationalities.            nationalities.
(10) The Chief Justice may            (10) The Supreme Court or, (10) [* * *]
make such scheme1 as he               as the case may be, the High
may deem appropriate for              Court, may make such
dealing with matters entrusted        scheme as the said Court
by sun-section (4) or sub- may deed appropriate for section (5) or sub-section (6) dealing with
matters entrusted to him. by sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5) or sub-section (6), to it.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
34

(11) Where more than one (11) Where more than one (11) Where more than one request has been
made under request has been made under request has been made under sub-section (4) or
sub-section sub-section (4) or sub-section sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) to the
(5) or sub-section (6) to 3 (5) or sub-section (6) to Chief Justices of different different High Courts
or their different arbitral institutions, High Courts or their designates, the High Court or the arbitral
institution to which designates, the Chief Justice its designate to whom the the request has been first
or his designate to whom the request has been first made made under the relevant sub- request has
been first made under the relevant sub-section section shall be competent to under the relevant
sub-section shall alone be competent to appoint. shall alone be competent to decide on the request
decide on the request.
(12) (a) Where the matters (12) (a) Where the matters (12) Where the matter referred to in
sub-sections (4), referred to in sub-sections (4), referred to in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and
(10) arise (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub- (5), (6) and (8) arise in an in an international commercial section
(10) arise in an international commercial arbitration, the reference to international commercial
arbitration or any other Chief Justice in those sub- arbitration, the reference to arbitration, the
reference to sections shall be construed as the Supreme Court or, as the the arbitral institution in
those a reference to the Chief case may be, the High Court sub-sections shall be Justice of India in
those sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to
(b) Where the matters construed as a reference to the arbitral institution referred to in sub-sections
(4), the Supreme Court; and (b) designated under sub-section (5), (6), (7), (8) and (10) arise where
the matters referred to (3-A). in any other arbitration, the in sub-sections (4), (5), (6), reference to
Chief Justice in (7), (8) and sub-section (10) those sub-sections shall be arise in any other
arbitration, construed as a reference to the reference to the Supreme the Chief Justice of the High
Court or, as the case may be, Court within whose local limits the High Court in those the principal
Civil Court subsections shall be referred to in clause (e) of construed as a reference to sub-section (1)
of section 2 is the High Court within whose situate and, where the High local limits the principal
Civil Court itself is the Court Court referred to in clause (e) referred to in that clause, to of
sub-section (1) of section 2 the Chief Justice of that High is situate, and where the High Court. Court
itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to that High Court.
NA (13) An application made (13) An application made under this section for under this section for
appointment of an arbitrator or appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be disposed
arbitrators shall be disposed of by the Supreme Court or of by the arbitral institution the High Court
or the person within a period of thirty days or institution designated by from the date of service of
such Court, as the case may notice on the opposite party. be, as expeditiously as possible and an
endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date of
service of notice on the opposite party.
(14) For the purpose of (14) The arbitral institution determination of the fees of shall determine the
fees of the the arbitral tribunal and the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its payment to the
manner of its payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High arbitral tribunal subject to the Court may
frame such rules rates specified in the Fourth as may be necessary, after Schedule.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
35

taking into consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule. Explanation.–– For NA the
removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub-
section shall not apply to international commercial arbitration and in arbitrations (other than
international commercial arbitration) in case where parties have agreed for determination of fees as
per the rules of an arbitral institution.
xx xx xx Section 16 of the Arbitration Act reads as under:
“16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.— (1) The arbitral
tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with
respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for that
purpose,—
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail
ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later
than the submission of the statement of defense; however, a party shall not be
precluded from raising such a plea merely because that he has appointed, or
participated in the appointment of, an arbitrator.
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be
raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised
during the arbitral proceedings.
(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3), admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified.
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea,
continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.
xx xx xx"
Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act read as under:
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
36

“34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.— (1) Recourse to a Court against an
arbitral award may be made only by an application for setting aside such award in
accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-
section (3).
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if—
(a) the party making the application establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal
that —
(i) a party was under some incapacity, or
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or,
failing any indication thereon, under the law for the time being in force; or
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an
arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration:
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated
from those not so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which contains
decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict
with a provision of this Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such
agreement, was not in accordance with this Part; or
(b) the Court finds that—
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under
the law for the time being in force, or
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.
Explanation 1—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the
public policy of India, only if,—
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of
section 75 or section 81; or
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
37

(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.” xx xx xx
Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 43 of the Arbitration Act reads as under:
“43. Limitations. – (1) The Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall apply to
arbitrations as it applies to proceedings in Courts.
(2) For the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), an
arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the date referred in section
21.
(3) Where an arbitration agreement to submit future disputes to arbitration provides that any claim
to which the agreement applies shall be barred unless the agreement, and a dispute arises to which
the agreement applies, the Court , if it is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue
hardship would otherwise be caused, and notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may
on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case may require, extend the time for such period as it
thinks proper.”
57. In, Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd. the Constitution Bench reiterated the earlier view expressed in
Mehul Construction Co., that an order appointing an arbitrator under Section 11 of the Arbitration
Act is an administrative order that did not mandate notice and hearing of the other party. Being an
administrative order, the Chief Justice or his nominee do not decide any preliminary issue, or the
issue of non-arbitrability, validity and existence of the arbitration agreement, which are to be
decided by the arbitrator at the first instance.
58. However, a Constitution Bench of seven Judges vide majority judgment in Patel Engineering
Ltd. overruled this ratio and held:
“38… But the basic requirement for exercising his power under Section 11(6), is the
existence of an arbitration agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act and the
applicant before the Chief Justice being shown to be a party to such an agreement. It
would also include the question of the existence of jurisdiction in him to entertain the
request and an enquiry whether at least a part of the cause of action has arisen within
the State concerned. Therefore, a decision on jurisdiction and on the existence of the
arbitration agreement and of the person making the request being a party to that
agreement and the subsistence of an arbitrable dispute require to be decided and the
decision on these aspects is a prelude to the Chief Justice considering whether the
requirements of sub-section (4), sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of Section 11 are
satisfied when approached with the request for appointment of an arbitrator......
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
38

39. It is necessary to define what exactly the Chief Justice, approached with an
application under Section 11 of the Act, is to decide at that stage. Obviously, he has to
decide his own jurisdiction in the sense whether the party making the motion has
approached the right High Court. He has to decide whether there is an arbitration
agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the person who has made the request
before him, is a party to such an agreement. It is necessary to indicate that he can
also decide the question whether the claim was a dead one; or a long-barred claim
that was sought to be resurrected and whether the parties have concluded the
transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or by
receiving the final payment without objection. It may not be possible at that stage, to
decide whether a live claim made, is one which comes within the purview of the
arbitration clause. It will be appropriate to leave that question to be decided by the
Arbitral Tribunal on taking evidence, along with the merits of the claims involved in
the arbitration. The Chief Justice has to decide whether the applicant has satisfied
the conditions for appointing an arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act. For the
purpose of taking a decision on these aspects, the Chief Justice can either proceed on
the basis of affidavits and the documents produced or take such evidence or get such
evidence recorded, as may be necessary. We think that adoption of this procedure in
the context of the Act would best serve the purpose sought to be achieved by the Act
of expediting the process of arbitration, without too many approaches to the court at
various stages of the proceedings before the Arbitral Tribunal.” In Patel Engineering
Ltd., the Court also held that Section 16 of the Arbitration Act makes explicit, what is
otherwise implicit, that the arbitral tribunal has jurisdiction to rule on its own
jurisdiction, including ruling on objections to existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement, but this provision would apply when the parties have gone to the arbitral
tribunal without recourse to Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act and not when the
court at the reference stage has decided the jurisdictional issues. Decision of the court
at the referral stage would be final and binding on the arbitral tribunal. Majority
judgment also clarified that when an arbitral tribunal has been constituted by the
parties without having taken recourse to a court order, the arbitral tribunal will have
jurisdiction to decide all matters contemplated by Section 16 of the Arbitration Act.
59. In National Insurance Company Limited v. Boghara Polyfab Private Limited,46 a two Judges’
Bench of this Court, elucidating on Patel Engineering Ltd., had identified and segregated the issues
that arise for consideration in an application under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act into three
categories, viz. (i) issues which the Chief Justice or his designate is bound to decide; (ii) issues which
he can also decide, that is, issues which he may choose to decide or leave it to the arbitral tribunal to
decide; and (iii) issues 46 (2009) 1 SCC 267 which should be left to the arbitral tribunal to decide,
and thereafter had enumerated them as under:
“22.1 The issues (first category) which the Chief Justice/his designate will have to
decide are:
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
39

(a) Whether the party making the application has approached the appropriate High
Court.
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether the party who has applied
under Section 11 of the Act, is a party to such an agreement.
22.2 The issues (second category) which the Chief Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or
leave them to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are:
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long-barred) claim or a live claim.
(b) Whether the parties have concluded the contract/transaction by recording
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final payment
without objection.
22.3 The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his designate should leave exclusively to the
Arbitral Tribunal are:
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration clause (as for example, a matter
which is reserved for final decision of a departmental authority and excepted or
excluded from arbitration).
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration.”
23. It is clear from the scheme of the Act as explained by this Court in SBP & Co., that in regard to
issues falling under the second category, if raised in any application under Section 11 of the Act, the
Chief Justice/his designate may decide them, if necessary, by taking evidence. Alternatively, he may
leave those issues open with a direction to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the same. If the Chief
Justice or his designate chooses to examine the issue and decides it, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot
re-examine the same issue. The Chief Justice/his designate will, in choosing whether he will decide
such issue or leave it to the Arbitral Tribunal, be guided by the object of the Act (that is expediting
the arbitration process with minimum judicial intervention). Where allegations of
forgery/fabrication are made in regard to the document recording discharge of contract by full and
final settlement, it would be appropriate if the Chief Justice/his designate decides the issue.”
24. What is however clear is when a respondent contends that the dispute is not arbitrable on
account of discharge of the contract under a settlement agreement or discharge voucher or no-claim
certificate, and the claimant contends that it was obtained by fraud, coercion or undue influence, the
issue will have to be decided either by the Chief Justice/his designate in the proceedings under
Section 11 of the Act or by the Arbitral Tribunal as directed by the order under Section 11 of the Act.
A claim for arbitration cannot be rejected merely or solely on the ground that a settlement
agreement or discharge voucher had been executed by the claimant, if its validity is disputed by the
claimant.”
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
40

60. The issues included in the first category were: whether the party making the application had
approached the appropriate High Court, that is, the jurisdictional High Court; whether there is an
arbitration agreement and whether the person who had applied under Section 11 is a party to such
agreement. This would include the question whether the defendant or the opposite party is a party
to the arbitration agreement or bound by the arbitration agreement in terms of Section 7 of the
Arbitration Act. With respect to the second category, the Court observed that the Chief Justice or his
designate may decide the issue, if necessary, by taking evidence or in the alternative may leave the
issues open with the direction to the arbitral tribunal to decide the same. Where the Chief Justice or
his designate examines the issue and decides it, the arbitral tribunal cannot re-examine the issue.
The Chief Justice or his designate would exercise this choice being guided by the object of the
Arbitration Act, that is, expediting the arbitration process with minimum judicial intervention.
Where dispute arises on account of settlement agreement, discharge voucher, no claim certificate
amounting to discharge or accord and satisfaction, and the other side contends that such certificates
were obtained by fraud, coercion or undue influence, the issue will have to be decided either by the
Chief Justice or his designate in proceedings under Section 11 or by the arbitral tribunal as directed
by the order under Section 11 of the Act. A claim for arbitration cannot be rejected merely or solely
on the ground that the settlement agreement or discharge voucher had been executed if its validity is
disputed. The third category would cover all other questions within the arbitration clause, which the
court believed are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal at the first stage. This was
explained by giving an example of a matter purportedly reserved for the final determination of the
departmental authority or excepted or excluded matters. It would also include merits of any claim
involved in arbitration.
61. Paragraph 22 of Boghara Polyfab Private Limited, if read carefully, states that the factors to be
considered while deciding an application under Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act would
require an examination of whether there exists an arbitration agreement, that is, the agreement
provides for arbitration proceedings in respect of disputes which have arisen between the parties to
the agreement. The latter portion requires the court to apply its mind whether the disputes which
have arisen can be settled by the arbitration agreement. The aforesaid observations, in our opinion,
would be in conformity with the majority decision of the Constitution Bench in Patel Engineering
Ltd. wherein it was observed that Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act are complimentary in
nature and the Court, while exercising powers under the two Sections on whether the matter should
be referred to arbitration, enjoys equal powers, otherwise, it would lead to an anomalous situation in
that a judicial authority has wider power under Section 8 but lesser power of examination under
Section 11.
62. In Arasmeta Captive Power Company Private Limited and Another v. Lafarge India Private
Limited,47 this Court had examined whether there is any conflict between Patel Engineering Ltd.
and Boghara Polyfab Private Limited on the question of the scope of inquiry while deciding an
application under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act. The Division Bench in Arasmeta Captive
Power Co. Pvt. Ltd. had referred to paragraph 39 and sub-para (iv) of paragraph 47 in Patel
Engineering Ltd., to observe:
“18. On a careful reading of para 39 and Conclusion
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
41

(iv), as set out in para 47 of SBP case [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC
618] , it is limpid that for the purpose of setting into motion the arbitral procedure
the Chief Justice or his designate is required to decide the issues, namely, (i)
territorial jurisdiction, (ii) existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties,
(iii) existence or otherwise of a live claim, and (iv) existence of the conditions for
exercise of power and further satisfaction as regards the qualification of the
arbitrator. That apart, under certain circumstances the Chief Justice or his designate
is also required to see whether a long-
barred claim is sought to be restricted and whether the parties had concluded the transaction by 47
(2013) 15 SCC 414 recording satisfaction of the mutual rights and obligations or by receiving the
final payment without objection.” Thereafter, reference was made to the opinion expressed in
judgment in Shree Ram Mills Ltd. v. Utility Premises (P) Ltd.,48 which it was contented had taken a
different view from one in Boghara Polyfab Private Limited. Disagreeing, the Court referred to the
three Judge Bench decision in Chloro Controls India Private Limited which had considered the issue
whether there was any variance between Shree Ram Mills Ltd. and Boghara Polyfab Private Limited,
to hold that there was none and both the judgments are capable of being read in harmony to bring in
line with the law declared in Patel Engineering Ltd. In particular, a reference was made to the
following portion of the paragraph 27 of Shree Ram Mills Ltd. and paragraph 119 of Chloro Controls
India Private Limited which read as under:
“27. … If the Chief Justice does not, in the strict sense, decide the issue, in that event
it is for him to locate such issue and record his satisfaction that such issue exists
between the parties. It is only in that sense that the finding on a live issue is given.
Even at the cost of repetition we must state that it is only for the purpose of finding
out whether the arbitral procedure has to be started that the Chief Justice has to
record satisfaction that there remains a live issue in between the parties. The same
thing is about the limitation which is always a mixed question of law and
48 (2007) 4 SCC 599 fact. The Chief Justice only has to record his satisfaction that prima facie the
issue has not become dead by the lapse of time or that any party to the agreement has not slept over
its rights beyond the time permitted by law to agitate those issues covered by the agreement. It is for
this reason that it was pointed out in the above paragraph that it would be appropriate sometimes to
leave the question regarding the live claim to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. All that he has to
do is to record his satisfaction that the parties have not closed their rights and the matter has not
been barred by limitation. Thus, where the Chief Justice comes to a finding that there exists a live
issue, then naturally this finding would include a finding that the respective claims of the parties
have not become barred by limitation.” xx xx xx “119. Thus, the Bench while explaining the
judgment of this Court in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] has stated that the
Chief Justice may not decide certain issues finally and upon recording satisfaction that prima facie
the issue has not become dead even leave it for the Arbitral Tribunal to decide.” In Arasmeta Captive
Power Co. (P) Ltd., elucidating on the question whether the dispute was arbitrable within the scope
of the arbitration clause should be decided by the Chief Justice/designate Judge or by the arbitrator,
this Court has observed:
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
42

“... The stress laid thereon may be innovative but when the learned Judges
themselves have culled out the ratio decidendi in para 39, it is extremely difficult to
state that the principle stated in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC
618] requires the Chief Justice or his designate to decide the controversy when raised
pertaining to arbitrability of the disputes. Or to express an opinion on excepted
matters. Such an inference by syllogistic process is likely to usher in catastrophe in
jurisprudence developed in this field. We are disposed to think so as it is not apposite
to pick up a line from here and there from the judgment or to choose one observation
from here or there for raising it to the status of “the ratio decidendi”. That is most
likely to pave one on the path of danger and it is to be scrupulously avoided. The
propositions set out in SBP, in our opinion, have been correctly understood by the
two-Judge Bench in Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd. and the same have been appositely
approved by the three-Judge Bench in Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. and we
respectfully concur with the same. We find no substance in the submission that the
said decisions require reconsideration, for certain observations made in SBP, were
not noticed. We may hasten to add that the three-Judge Bench has been satisfied that
the ratio decidendi of the judgment in SBP is really inhered in para 39 of the
judgment.”
63. B.N. Srikrishna, J. in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. and
Another,49 a case relating to transnational arbitration under the New York
Convention, had invoked the principle of ex visceribus actus for interpretation of the
Arbitration Act. Sub-section (3) of Section 8 of the Arbitration Act envisages that
even in a situation where an application to the court has been made in a pending
proceeding, arbitration proceedings may commence and continue and even an award
can be made. Section 16, it was held, incorporates the principles of separation and
competence-competence thereby clearly indicating that the
49 (2005) 7 SCC 234 arbitrator can decide his or her own jurisdiction even when the validity of the
main contract or the arbitration agreement is challenged. Section 34 states that the Court can go
into three different aspects of arbitrability at the post-award stage. Therefore, the Arbitration Act
itself envisages that the arbitral tribunal should rule on the questions of non-arbitrability subject to
the second look of the court post the award. This helps in expeditious and quick disposal of matters
before the court at the first stage while reserving the court’s power to examine the three facets of
arbitrability at the third stage. This also prevents the possibility of a multiplicity of trials, an aspect
highlighted in Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. On the ambit of the Court’s jurisdiction at the reference
stage, it was observed that the correct approach to the review of the arbitration agreement would be
restricted to prima facie finding that there exists an arbitration agreement that is not null and void,
inoperative or incapable of being performed. The key rationale for holding that the courts’ review of
the arbitration agreement should be limited to a prima facie standard is the principle of
competence- competence. Further, were the courts are to be empowered to fully scrutinize the
arbitration agreement an arbitral proceeding would have to be stayed until such time that the court
seized of the matter renders a decision on the arbitration agreement. If the finding of the courts
would be a final and determinative conclusion, then it is obvious that, until such a pronouncement is
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
43

made, the arbitral proceedings would have to hang in abeyance. This evidently would defeat the
credo and ethos of the Arbitration Act, which is to enable expeditious arbitration without avoidable
intervention by the judicial authorities. As a result, the approach to be adopted at the reference stage
is whether it is ‘plainly arguable’ that the arbitration agreement is in existence. The judgment laid
emphasis on the fact that the rule of priority in favour of the arbitrators is counter-balanced by the
courts’ power to review the existence and validity of the arbitration agreement at the end of the
arbitral process. It was elucidated:
“Even if the court takes the view that the arbitral agreement is not vitiated or that it is
not invalid, inoperative or unenforceable, based upon purely a prima facie view,
nothing prevents the arbitrator from trying the issue fully and rendering a final
decision thereupon … Even after the court takes a prima facie view that the
arbitration agreement is not vitiated on account of factors enumerated in Section 45,
and the arbitrator upon a full trial holds that there is no vitiating factor in the
arbitration agreement and makes an award, such an award can be challenged under
Section 48(1)(a). The award will be set aside if the party against whom it is invoked
satisfies the court inter alia that the agreement was not valid under the law to which
the parties had subjected it or under the law of the country where the award was
made. The two basic requirements, namely, expedition at the pre-
reference stage, and a fair opportunity to contest the award after full trial, would be
fully satisfied by the interpreting Section 45 as enabling the court to act on a prima
facie view.
[T]he object of the Act would be defeated if the proceedings remain pending in the
court even after commencing of the arbitration. It is precisely for this reason that I
am inclined to the view that at the pre- reference stage contemplated by Section 45,
the court is required to take only a prima facie view for making the reference, leaving
the parties to a full trial either before the Arbitral Tribunal or before the court at the
post-award stage.” D.M. Dharmadhikari, J. in his partly concurring opinion agreed
with the view expressed by B.N. Srikrishna, J. on most of the above aspects with the
following reservation:
“112. Whether such a decision of the judicial authority or the court, of refusal to make
a reference on grounds permissible under Section 45 of the Act would be subjected to
further re-examination before the Arbitral Tribunal or the court in which eventually
the award comes up for enforcement in accordance with Section 48(1)(a) of the Act, is
a legal question of sufficient complexity and in my considered opinion since that
question does not directly arise on the facts of the present case, it should be left open
for consideration in an appropriate case where such a question is directly raised and
decided by the court.” While Y.K.Sabharwal, J. (as His Lordship then was) dissented.
64. We would now refer to decisions of this court post enforcement of Act 3 of 2016
with effect from 23 rd October,2015. Reference Order observes that “one moot
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
44

question that therefore arises, and which needs to be authoritatively decided by a
Bench of three learned Judges, is whether the word ‘existence’ would include
weeding-out arbitration clauses in agreements which indicate that the subject matter
is incapable of arbitration”. Thereafter paragraph 59 from Duro Felguera S.A. as to
the scope of Section 11(6-A) is quoted.
65. In Mayavati Trading Private Limited v. Pradyuat Deb Burman,50 a three Judge
Bench has held that the legislature by inserting sub-
section (6-A) to Section 11 and making amendments to Section 8 by Act 3 of 2016 has legislatively
introduced a new regime so as to dilute and legislatively overrule the effect and ratio of the
judgment of this Court in Patel Engineering Ltd. Reliance was placed on paragraph 48 and 59 in
Duro Felguera S.A. The concluding paragraph in Mayavati Trading Private Limited records:
“10. This being the position, it is clear that the law prior to the 2015 Amendment that
has been laid down by this Court, which would have included going into whether
accord and satisfaction has taken place, has now been legislatively overruled. This
being the position, it is difficult to agree with the reasoning contained in the aforesaid
judgment, as Section 11(6- A) is confined to the examination of the existence of an
arbitration agreement and is to be understood in the narrow sense as has been laid
down in the judgment in Duro Felguera, SA.”
50 (2019) 8 SCC 714
66. Paragraph 48 and paragraph 59 of Duro Felguera, S.A. referred to above, read as under:
“48...From a reading of Section 11(6-A), the intention of the legislature is crystal clear
i.e. the court should and need only look into one aspect—the existence of an
arbitration agreement. What are the factors for deciding as to whether there is an
arbitration agreement is the next question. The resolution to that is simple—it needs
to be seen if the agreement contains a clause which provides for arbitration
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the parties to the agreement.
xx xx xx
59. The scope of the power under Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act was considerably wide
in view of the decisions in SBP and Co. and Boghara Polyfab . This position continued
till the amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all that the courts
need to see is whether an arbitration agreement exists— nothing more, nothing less.
The legislative policy and purpose is essentially to minimise the Court's intervention
at the stage of appointing the arbitrator and this intention as incorporated in Section
11(6-A) ought to be respected.”
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
45

67. Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in A. Ayyasamy observed that Section 8 of the Arbitration Act has
made a departure from Article 8 of UNCITRAL Model Law as the former uses the expression
‘judicial authority’ rather than court and the words “unless it finds that the agreement is null and
void, inoperative and incapable of being performed” mentioned in Article 8 do not find place in
Section 8. Section 16 empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule upon its own jurisdiction, including the
ruling with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. Further clause (b) to
Section 16(1) stipulates that a decision by an arbitral tribunal that the main contract is void, will not
entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause. The arbitration agreement survives for
determining whether the contract in which the arbitration clause is embodied is null and void,
which would include voidability. The severability doctrine in arbitration is of crucial significance.
Reference was made to the judgment of the U.K. Court of Appeal in Fiona Trust and Holding Corpn.
v. Privalov,51 which judgment was affirmed by the House of Lords in Filli Shipping Co. Limited v.
Premium Nafta Products Ltd.,52 to highlight that the arbitration clause should be liberally
construed in favour of one-stop arbitration. Mere allegation that the agent had no authority to enter
into the main contract is not necessarily an attack on the arbitration agreement. The principle of
severability treats arbitration agreement as a distinct agreement that can be void or voidable only on
the ground that relates to the arbitration agreement. Reference was also made to the opinion of
Scalia, J. of the 51 (2007) 1 All ER (Comm) 891 : 2007 Bus LR 686 (CA) 52 2007 UKHL 40 : 2007
Bus LR 1719 (HL) Supreme Court of America in Buckeye Check Cashing Inc. v.
Cardegna53 that arbitration agreement is severable from the remainder of the contract and unless
the challenge is to the arbitration clause itself, the issue of contract’s validity should be considered
by the arbitrator in the first instance. In conclusion, it was observed:
“48. The basic principle which must guide judicial decision-making is that arbitration
is essentially a voluntary assumption of an obligation by contracting parties to resolve
their disputes through a private tribunal. The intent of the parties is expressed in the
terms of their agreement. Where commercial entities and persons of business enter
into such dealings, they do so with a knowledge of the efficacy of the arbitral process.
The commercial understanding is reflected in the terms of the agreement between the
parties. The duty of the court is to impart to that commercial understanding a sense
of business efficacy.
xx xx xx
53. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, should in my view be interpreted so
as to bring in line the principles underlying its interpretation in a manner that is
consistent with prevailing approaches in the common law world. Jurisprudence in
India must evolve towards strengthening the institutional efficacy of arbitration.
Deference to a forum chosen by parties as a complete remedy for resolving all their
claims is but part of that evolution. Minimising the intervention of courts is again a
recognition of the same principle.”
53 163 L Ed 2d 1038 : 546 US 440 (2006) : 2006 SCC OnLine US SC 14
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
46

68. In Garware Wall Ropes Limited v. Coastal Marine Constructions and Engineering Limited,54
the question related to the effect of an arbitration clause contained in the master contract which was
required to be stamped. The second part of Section 7(2) was applicable. The issue was whether the
judge hearing the Section 11 application should impound the main contract and ensure that duty
and penalty, if any, are paid or in view of sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 this issue should be
examined and decided by the arbitrator. The argument drawing distinction between validity and
existence was raised before the Court (see paragraph 5 which records the contention) but was
rejected for several reasons, including the reasoning given in Patel Engineering Ltd., to hold that it
is difficult to accede to the argument that Section 16 of the Arbitration Act makes it clear that an
arbitration agreement has an independent existence of its own. Secondly, on the connect between
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement, it was observed:
“20. Looked at from a slightly different angle, an arbitration agreement which is
contained in an agreement or conveyance is dealt with in Section 7(2) of the 1996 Act.
We are concerned with the first part of Section 7(2) on the facts of the present case,
and therefore, the arbitration clause that is contained in 54 (2019) 9 SCC 209 the
sub-contract in question is the subject-matter of the present appeal. It is significant
that an arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause “in a
contract”.
21. Sections 2(a), 2(b), 2(g) and 2(h) of the Contract Act, 1872 (the Contract Act) read
as under:
“2. Interpretation clause.—In this Act the following words and expressions are used
in the following senses, unless a contrary intention appears from the context—
(a) When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from
doing anything, with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or
abstinence, he is said to make a proposal;
(b) When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the
proposal is said to be accepted. A proposal, when accepted, becomes a promise;
xx xx xx
(g) An agreement not enforceable by law is said to be void;
(h) An agreement enforceable by law is a contract;
22. When an arbitration clause is contained “in a contract”, it is significant that the agreement only
becomes a contract if it is enforceable by law. We have seen how, under the Stamp Act, an
agreement does not become a contract, namely, that it is not enforceable in law, unless it is duly
stamped. Therefore, even a plain reading of Section 11(6-A), when read with Section 7(2) of the 1996
Act and Section 2(h) of the Contract Act, would make it clear that an arbitration clause in an
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
47

agreement would not exist when it is not enforceable by law. This is also an indicator that SMS Tea
Estates has, in no manner, been touched by the amendment of Section 11(6-A).” Thereafter,
reference was made to paragraph 83 in Enercon (India) Ltd. v. Enercon GmbH55 wherein the
concept of separability of arbitration clause or agreement from the underlying contract was dealt
with, and it was observed that it is necessary to ensure that the intention of the parties does not
evaporate into thin air when there is a challenge to the legality, validity, finality, or breach of the
underlying contract. This is the mandate of Section 16 of the Arbitration Act which accepts the
concept that the main contract and the arbitration agreement form two different contracts. It is true
that support of the national courts would be required to ensure the success of arbitration but this
would not detract from the legitimacy or independence of the collateral arbitration agreement even
if it is contained in a contract, which is claimed to be void or voidable or un-concluded. However,
this judgment was distinguished in Garware Wall Ropes Limited as a case relating to the
controversy whether an arbitration clause was to apply even if there is no concluded contract, but
the finding was to the contrary as the case was within the second part and not under the first part of
Section 7(2) of the Arbitration Act. In Enercon (India) 55 (2014) 5 SCC 1 : (2014) 3 SCC (Civ) 59
Ltd., on facts it was held that the arbitration clause was separate from the main contract as the
disputes relating to the intellectual property right license agreement were arbitrable. Thereafter,
reference was made to the decision in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Hyundai Engg. &
Construction Co. Ltd. 56 and it was observed that the arbitration clause was identical as in Oriental
Insurance Company Limited v. Narbheram Power and Steel Private Limited57 with the conditional
expression of intent only when the liability was unequivocally admitted by the insurer and the
dispute was related to the quantum to be paid under the policy. On the question of ‘existence’ and
‘validity’, the Bench held:
“29. This judgment in Hyundai Engg. case is important in that what was specifically
under consideration was an arbitration clause which would get activated only if an
insurer admits or accepts liability. Since on facts it was found that the insurer
repudiated the claim, though an arbitration clause did “exist”, so to speak, in the
policy, it would not exist in law, as was held in that judgment, when one important
fact is introduced, namely, that the insurer has not admitted or accepted liability.
Likewise, in the facts of the present case, it is clear that the arbitration clause that is
contained in the sub-contract would not “exist” as a matter of law until the
sub-contract is duly stamped, as has been held by us above. The argument that
Section 11(6-A) deals with “existence”, as opposed to Section 8, Section 16 and
Section 45, which deal with “validity” of an arbitration agreement is answered by this
Court's understanding of the
56 (2018) 17 SCC 607 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 530 57 (2018) 6 SCC 534 expression “existence” in
Hyundai Engg. case, as followed by us.”
69. In Narbheram Power and Steel Private Limited, a three Judges’ Bench of this Court had decided
the Civil Appeal arising from an application under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act in an
insurance contract. Primarily relying upon the decision of three Judges’ Bench in Vulcan Insurance
Co. Ltd. v. Maharaj Singh and Another,58 it was held that the disputes were not arbitrable as in
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
48

terms of the arbitration clause as the insurer had disputed and not accepted the liability. The
arbitration clause applies only if there is a dispute pertaining to the quantum. This decision, though
dated 2nd May 2018, did not refer to Section 11(6-A) of the Arbitration Act and interpret the same.
The Civil Appeal had arisen from the correspondence exchanged between the insurance company
and the insured in the years 2013 and 2014. However, reference was made to the concurring opinion
of Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. in A. Ayyasamy, and it was observed that the decision was not
applicable to the case at hand. The decision in Chloro Controls India Private Limited was held to be
not remotely relevant for deciding the lis in the said case. 58 (1976) 1 SCC 943
70. This decision in Narbheram Power and Steel Private Limited was followed in Hyundai Engg. &
Construction Co. Ltd., wherein a similar arbitration clause had come up for consideration. However,
in this case, reference was made to Section 11(6-A) of the Arbitration Act. It is, therefore, clear that
on two occasions, in Narbheram Power and Steel Private Limited and Hyundai Engineering and
Construction Company Limited, a three Judges’ Bench of this Court affirmatively and in clear terms
held that the question of non-arbitrability relating to the enquiry whether the dispute was governed
by the arbitration clause, can be examined by the courts at the reference stage and may not be left
unanswered to be examined and decided by the arbitral tribunal. These are decisions by a Bench of
three Judges and, as noticed above, were quoted with affirmation in Garware Wall Ropes Limited by
a Bench of two Judges.
71. In M/s. PSA Mumbai Investments PTE. Limited v. The Board of Trustees of the Jawaharlal
Nehru Port Trust and Another,59 a division bench of this Court, after referring to in detail the global
invitation of request for qualification and the request for proposal, came to the conclusion that the
arbitration clause in the request for 59 Civil Appeal No. 9352 of 2018 decided on 11th September
2018. qualification documents would not be applicable and govern the disputes. Therefore, the
respondent was left to pursue its claim before an appropriate forum, in accordance with law. The
decision was made at the first or the referral stage.
72. At this stage we would like to refer to different views expressed by scholars on the subject, which
also refer to the legal position in different countries. Stavros Brekoulakis in his paper titled On
Arbitrability: Persisting Misconceptions and New Areas of Concern accepts that as per prevailing
view in-arbitrability of the subject matter of the arbitration agreement renders the arbitration
agreement invalid. However, he argues that in-arbitrability of the subject matter is an issue
concerning jurisdiction of arbitral tribunal rather than the validity of the arbitration agreement.
Referring to Article V(1)(a) and Article V(2)(a) of the New York Convention, he draws a distinction
between in-arbitrability and invalidity. Arbitration agreements are sui generis contracts with both
contractual and jurisdictional features. The latter is wider in scope. The courts at the referral stage
may review only whatever is related to the formation of the arbitration agreement as a substantive
contract, that is, contractual aspects of the arbitration agreement and jurisdictional aspects of the
arbitration agreement should be left to the arbitral tribunal. In other words, at the stage of referral,
the courts may review only whatever is related to the formation of the arbitration agreement (the
contractual aspects of the arbitration agreement) and the issues relating to the jurisdictional aspects
of the arbitration agreement, which as per the author includes the question relating to
non-arbitrability of the claims, should be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunals.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
49

Thus, distinction is drawn between validity in terms of substantive and formal validity of an
arbitration agreement as contractual aspects; and whether a claim is non-arbitrable. The latter
question would be arbitrable and not for the courts to decide at the referral stage. However, on
referring to Articles II(1) and II(3) of the New York Convention the author did observe that it seems
to include arbitrability of subject matter within the essential meaning of an arbitration agreement.
73. Emmanuel Gaillard and Yas Banifatemi in Negative Effect of Competence-Competence: The
Rule of Priority in Favour of the Arbitrators observe that it is the basic requirement that the parties
to the arbitration agreement should honour their undertaking to submit to the arbitration any
dispute covered by the agreement. This entails the consequence that the courts are prohibited from
hearing such disputes. On the question of courts’ interference at the reference stage in terms of
Article II(3) of the New York Convention, they are of the opinion that there is no indication provided
as to the standard that should be applied for such determination, that is, whether the courts are
required to conduct in-depth investigation into the merits of the existence and validity of the
arbitration agreement and issue a final decision on the question, or the court should restrict itself to
prima facie verification that the arbitration agreement exists and is valid, and reserve its full review
until the time when there is an action to enforce or set aside the arbitral award. The question, in
effect, is one of timing and to the extent the courts are entitled to review the existence and validity of
the arbitration agreement. The answer, they observe, is found in the notion of
competence-competence, one of the founding principles of the international arbitration law that
provides the arbitrators with power to rule on their own jurisdiction and embodies the mirroring
effect that the court should refrain from engaging in examination of the arbitrator’s jurisdiction
before the arbitrators themselves have an opportunity to do so. This, they state, by no means
suggests that the domestic courts relinquish their power to review the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement which is first left to the arbitrators to rule. The courts enjoy the power of
scrutiny after the award is rendered. They have referred to decisions of the higher courts of
Switzerland, 60 England, France, Canada and India (Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd.) to observe that
the court’s review at the first stage is limited to prima facie verification of existence and validity of
the arbitration clause without the question being analysed in detail which the tribunal is empowered
to decide when necessary. At the reference stage, the court shall decline jurisdiction if the summary
examination of the arbitration agreement does not allow it to find that the agreement is null and
void, inoperative and incapable of being performed. The Canadian courts, apply the general rule that
in any case involving an arbitration clause, a challenge to arbitrator’s jurisdiction must be resolved
first by the arbitrator and the court will depart from this rule of systematic referral of arbitration
only if the challenge to arbitrator’s jurisdiction is solely based on a question of law. Exercise of
court’s jurisdiction in the latter case would be justified as the court is the forum to which the parties
first apply when 60 Article 5 of the Concordat (domestic law) provides that any dispute concerning
rights the parties may freely dispose of is capable of resolution by arbitration, unless the subject
matter of the dispute falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of a state authority by virtue of
mandatory law. requesting for referral and that the arbitrator’s jurisdiction regarding his or her
jurisdiction can be reviewed by the court. Further, it allows the court to decide the legal argument
for once and for all and avoids duplication of a strictly legal debate. Another condition is that the
court must be satisfied that the challenge to the arbitrator’s jurisdiction is not a delaying tactic and
that it will not unduly impair the conduct of arbitration proceedings. This means that the court,
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
50

when considering one of the exceptions, may allow the arbitrator to rule on his or her competence as
would be best for the arbitration process.
74. Referring to the House of Lords decision in Premium Nafta Products Ltd., the authors have
observed that the decision reaffirms the principle of severability of an arbitration agreement and the
proper approach is to stay the court proceedings in favour of arbitration. Lord Hoffmann speaking
for the House of Lords in Premium Nafta Products Ltd. has observed:
“to determine on the evidence before the court that [an arbitration agreement] does
exist in which case (if the disputes fall within the terms of that agreement) a stay
must be granted, in the light of the mandatory ‘shall’ in section 9(4). It is this
mandatory provision which is the statutory enactment of the relevant article of the
New York Convention, to which the United Kingdom is a party.” xx xx xx “the
arbitrators are, ‘in general’, recognised the right ‘to be the first tribunal to consider
whether they have jurisdiction to determine the dispute’ are limited by the
requirement that a valid arbitration agreement exist, as well as the further
requirements that the arbitration agreement be ‘wide enough to comprise the
relevant dispute’ and that the arbitration agreement not be ‘directly impeached by
whatever ground... to attack the invalidity of the contract in which the arbitration
clause is contained’. In other words, to the extent that the English courts retain a
degree of scrutiny as regards the existence, validity and scope of the arbitration
agreement, the question of the extent to which English courts will give effect to the
negative effect of competence-competence remains uncertain.”
75. John J. Barcelo III, in his paper titled ‘Who Decides the Arbitrator’s Jurisdiction? Separability
and Competence-Competence in Transnational Perspective’, observes that the greater the number of
issues required to be fully adjudicated at Stage I, the greater is the potential for disruption of the
arbitration process by an obstructing party even in case of a genuine agreement to arbitration. An
extremely pro-arbitration approach with no or minimal judicial scrutiny might send all the
questions to the arbitrators. At the same time arbitration is no holy grail and not all parties resisting
arbitration are obstructionists. A party must have its say in the court, unless he has agreed to
arbitrate. A good legal order must decide what weight be given to these competing values and how to
structure the process to maximize overall value by reducing opportunities for obstructionism while
preserving legitimate claims for reasonably prompt judicial decision. Referring to the
competence-competence and severability principles the author has observed: -
“Competence-competence thus addresses the “who decides” question on a broader
scale and is more central to resolving the policy tension between protecting
arbitration from obstruction, on one hand, and preserving legitimate disputes over
arbitrator jurisdiction for a prompt court hearing, on the other... Whereas
separability is universally accepted, competence-competence is controversial and has
spawned a range of different national responses.” The French approach, as the paper
notes, is that if an arbitral tribunal is already seized of the matter, the court will
refuse jurisdiction and leave questions as to existence, validity and scope of the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
51

arbitration agreement to the arbitrators. However, if the arbitral tribunal is not yet
seized of the matter, the court will undertake a limited scrutiny of the challenge and
will retain jurisdiction only if the arbitration agreement is manifestly null. The
German Law of Kompetenz-Kompetenz prior to the new 1998 German Arbitration
Act was relatively unique, or arguably so, as some commentaries maintain that when
express power to decide their jurisdiction is conferred on the arbitrator, then it would
exclude judicial scrutiny at state 1 and stage 3. However, the 1998 German
Arbitration Act based upon UNCITRAL Model Law, states that the court may only
decide the arbitrator’s jurisdiction if requested to do so before the arbitral tribunal is
constituted. The German Law expostulates preference for the arbitrator to decide the
jurisdiction in an interim award. Referring to the UNCITRAL Model Law, reference is
made to the competence-competence as spelled in Article 8(1) which directly deals
with judicial review at Stage I, which is limited to the existence of a valid arbitration
agreement. It postulates that the parties shall be referred to arbitration, unless the
court finds that the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being
performed. This, the author feels, could be read as authorizing full judicial
determination and settlement of arbitration agreement’s existence and validity.
Article 16 (1) embodies the positive competence-competence concept and Articles
16(3) and 8(2) enact a partial negative competence-
competence principle. The latter allows arbitration proceedings to go forward despite the court
consideration of the arbitrator’s jurisdiction. Article 16(3) encourages outcome by expressly
empowering arbitrators to rule over their jurisdiction as a preliminary question. The British
Arbitration Act of 1996 based on the Model Law requires the court to stay the legal proceedings,
‘unless satisfied’ that the arbitration agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being
performed. “Unless satisfied”, the author observes, is closer to “unless it is manifest”, rather than it
is to the Model Law terminology “unless it finds”. The British Act allows the arbitrator to render
his/her decision on jurisdiction either in the preliminary award or in the final award, but allows the
parties to insist the arbitrators for preliminary and an early decision as a check against wasteful
proceedings. The paper also deals with the American approach in domestic and international
arbitration. In domestic law the issues of arbitrability have been divided into procedural and
substantial objections. Procedural arbitrability issues include whether a time limit for bringing a
claim has been observed or whether a party has waived its right to arbitrate and also issues like
waiver or estoppel thereby denying a party from claiming the right or any pre-condition for invoking
arbitration has not been made, etc. These issues are ‘gateway questions’ 61 that are presumptively
for the arbitrator to decide and not for the courts to decide, at least at the first stage. The substantive
aspects are those wherein the court at the first stage would go into prima facie examination.
Substantive issues pertaining to the validity and 61 First Options of Chicago v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938
(1995) and Howsam v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 537 U.S. 79 (2002).
existence of the arbitration agreement (Legal position in domestic law post- Buckeye Check Cashing
Inc. is explained below.) He observes that the United States Supreme Court has frequently been
more receptive to international as opposed to domestic agreements. An important consideration
being that international agreements are commercial and involve sophisticated, generally
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
52

well-advised parties and there is a need for uniformity of interpretation under the New York
Convention.
76. The United States Supreme Court in Buckeye Check Cashing Inc., relying on earlier decisions in
Prima Paint Corpn. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co.62 and Southland Corpn. v. Keating,63 in respect of
the domestic American law has clarified the legal position as establishing the following propositions:
“First, as a matter of substantive federal arbitration law, an arbitration provision is
severable from the remainder of the contract. Second, unless the challenge is to the
arbitration clause itself, the issue of the contract’s validity is considered by the
arbitrator in the first instance...Applying them to this case, we conclude that because
respondents challenge the Agreement, but not specifically its arbitration provisions,
those provisions are enforceable apart from the remainder of the contract. The
challenge should therefore be considered by an arbitrator, not a court.” 62 18 L Ed 2d
1270: 388 US 395 (1967): 1967 SCC OnLine US SC 160 63 79 L Ed. 2d 1: 465 US 1
(1984): 1984 SCC OnLine US SC 19 However, these observations have to be read with
caution as American law states that:
“(a) party aggrieved by the alleged failure... of another to arbitrate... (the) court shall
hear the parties, and upon being satisfied that the making of the agreement for
arbitration or the failure to comply therewith is not an issue, the court shall make an
order directing the parties to arbitration....if the making of the arbitration agreement
or the failure, neglect or refusal to perform the same be in issue, the court shall
proceed summarily to the trial thereof.” Therefore, in case of issue, if in the trial the
court determines that arbitration agreement was not made it does not order the
parties to arbitration. However, this principle does not apply when the arbitration
clause is contained in a ‘container contract’ by the application of ‘separability’
doctrine. In Buckeye Check Cashing Inc., the US Supreme Court held that
separability doctrine applies to both voidable and void ‘container contract’ with an
arbitration agreement. Distinction is drawn and different principles apply to
‘container contract’ with an arbitration clause, and stand-alone arbitration
agreement.64 Buckeye Check Cashing Inc. ruled that courts must send to arbitrators
any “challenge to the validity of the contract as a whole,” (the container contract),
while courts themselves must resolve any challenge directed “specifically to the 64
Prof. Stephen J. Ware in Arbitration Law’s Separability Doctrine After Buckeye Check
Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna arbitration clause”. When arbitrators hear any challenge to
the container contract’s validity, Buckeye Check Cashing Inc. cautioned:
“The issue of the contract’s validity is different from the issue of whether any
agreement between the alleged obligor and oblige was ever concluded.”
77. Prof. Alan Scott Rau65 questions the “abstract distinction between ‘invalidity and nonexistence”
as “nothing”. The author while supporting the principle of separability rejects the argument that
formation of a contract is different from enforcement of the contract as when the agreement is
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
53

invalid there is no agreement to anything. He observes:
“But how much of an improvement is it, really, to sweep away the conceptual
distinction between “void and voidable” contracts—only to replace it with the equally
abstract distinct between “invalidity” and “nonexistence”? These are all, as a
colleague of mine likes to say, nothing but word balloons.
Ingenious riffs on this metaphysical distinction between contract “invalidity” and
contract “nonexistence" have long been a staple of Continental legal learning. It has
been well-established for over a century in learned treatises on the law of obligations.
Its tendency to take metaphor for reality, its personification of legal concepts, its
characterization of doctrine in terms of what is “unthinkable” or “impossible”...of all
of this exemplifies the worst excesses of formalism....But like the “void/voidable”
distinction that it closely resembles...to which indeed it 65 Alan Scott Rau in
Separability in the United States Supreme Court may even be identical50...this is not
only slippery, but serves no instrumental function whatever. Happily, some modern
scholarship seems now at last to appreciate that the whole notion of “nonexistence” is
not only sterile and purely verbal...but what is worse, is completely unnecessary. And
particularly when we come to the doctrine of “separability,” this is a distinction that
leads precisely.
Foot note 50 reads as:
“See Christian Larroumet, 3 Droit Civil: Les Obligations, Le Contrat 539-540, 580-81
(5th ed. 2003) (French case law has often conflated the notions of a contract’s
“nonexistence” and its “invalidity”; if an essential condition imposed by the law is
missing then whether the agreement is termed void [null] or nonexistent “amounts to
the same thing, for what is void is treated to all intents and purpose as if it had never
existed”, nonexistence and “voidness” are “one and the same notion”).”
78. Prof. Stephen J. Ware in Arbitration Law’s Separability Doctrine After Buckeye Check Cashing,
Inc., with reference to the American Law projects a different view:
“under the contractual approach to arbitration law, the right to litigate (like other
rights) would be alienable through an enforceable contract but not a contract that is
unenforceable due to misrepresentation, duress, illegality, or any other contract-law
defense. By contrast, the separability doctrine holds that a party alienates its right to
litigate when that party forms a contract containing an arbitration clause even if that
contract is unenforceable...The only way to fix this problem is to repeal the
separability doctrine and allow courts to hear defenses to the enforcement of the
contract containing the arbitration clause. Courts should send cases to arbitration
only after rejecting any such defenses.”
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
54

79. In order to appreciate the effect of the amendments made by Act 3 of 2016, it would be
appropriate to refer to the Law Commission’s 246th Report which had given reasons for
amendments to Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act, including insertion of sub-section (6- A) to
Section 11. The said reasons read as under:
“24. Two further sets of amendments have been proposed in this context. First, it is
observed that a lot of time is spent for appointment of arbitrators at the very
threshold of arbitration proceedings as applications under section 11 are kept
pending for many years. In this context, the Commission has proposed a few
amendments. The Commission has proposed changing the existing scheme of the
power of appointment being vested in the “Chief Justice” to the “High Court” and the
“Supreme Court” and has expressly clarified that delegation of the power of
“appointment” (as opposed to a finding regarding the existence/nullity of the
arbitration agreement) shall not be regarded as a judicial act. This would rationalise
the law and provide greater incentive for the High Court and/or Supreme Court to
delegate the power of appointment (being a non-judicial act) to specialised, external
persons or institutions. The Commission has further recommended an amendment to
section 11(7) so that decisions of the High Court (regarding existence/nullity of the
arbitration agreement) are final where an arbitrator has been appointed, and as such
are non-appealable. The Commission further proposes the addition of section 11(13)
which requires the Court to make an endeavour to dispose of the matter within sixty
days from the service of notice on the opposite party.
xx xx xx
31. The Commission is of the view that, in this context, the same test regarding scope
and nature of judicial intervention, as applicable in the context of section 11, should
also apply to sections 8 and 45 of the Act – since the scope and nature of judicial
intervention should not change upon whether a party (intending to defeat the
arbitration agreement) refuses to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the arbitration
agreement, or moves a proceeding before a judicial authority in the face of such an
arbitration agreement.
32. In relation to the nature of intervention, the exposition of the law is to be found in
the decision of the Supreme Court in Shin Etsu Chemicals Co. Ltd. v.
Aksh Optifibre, (2005) 7 SCC 234, (in the context of section 45 of the Act), where the Supreme Court
has ruled in favour of looking at the issues/controversy only prima facie.
33. It is in this context, the Commission has recommended amendments to sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of judicial intervention is only restricted to
situations where the Court/Judicial Authority finds that the arbitration agreemend does not exist or
is null and void. In so far as the nature of intervention is concerned, it is recommended that in the
event the Court/Judicial Authority is prima facie satisfied against the argument challenging the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
55

arbitration agreement, it shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer the parties to arbitration, as the
case may be. The amendment envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to
arbitration only if it finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and
void. If the judicial authority is of the opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, then
it shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be
finally determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the judicial authority concludes that the
agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will be final and not prima facie. The amendment also
envisages that there shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration agreement is
null and void. In the event that the judicial authority refers the dispute to arbitration and/or
appoints an arbitrator, under sections 8 and 11 respectively, such a decision will be final and
non-appealable. An appeal can be maintained under section 37 only in the event of refusal to refer
parties to arbitration, or refusal to appoint an arbitrator.” The Law Commission’s Report specifically
refers to the decision of this Court in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd., a decision relating to
transnational arbitration covered by the New York Convention.
80. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of Act 3 of 2016 read as under:
“Statement of Objects and Reasons ***
6. It is proposed to introduce the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill,
2015, to replace the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015,
which inter alia, provides for the following, namely—
(i) to amend the definition of “Court” to provide that in the case of international
commercial arbitrations, the Court should be the High Court;
(ii) to ensure that an Indian Court can exercise jurisdiction to grant interim measures, etc., even
where the seat of the arbitration is outside India;
(iii) an application for appointment of an arbitrator shall be disposed of by the High Court or
Supreme Court, as the case may be, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour should be made
to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days;
(iv) to provide that while considering any application for appointment of arbitrator, the High Court
or the Supreme Court shall examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement and not
other issues;
(v) to provide that the Arbitral Tribunal shall make its award within a period of twelve months from
the date it enters upon the reference and that the parties may, however, extend such period up to six
months, beyond which period any extension can only be granted by the Court, on sufficient cause;
(vi) to provide that a model fee schedule on the basis of which High Courts may frame rules for the
purpose of determination of fees of Arbitral Tribunal, where a High Court appoints arbitrator in
terms of Section 11 of the Act;
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
56

(vii) to provide that the parties to dispute may at any stage agree in writing that their dispute be
resolved through fast-track procedure and the award in such cases shall be made within a period of
six months;
(viii) to provide for neutrality of arbitrators, when a person is approached in connection with
possible appointment as an arbitrator;
(ix) to provide that application to challenge the award is to be disposed of by the Court within one
year.
7. The amendments proposed in the Bill will ensure that arbitration process becomes more
user-friendly, cost effective and leads to expeditious disposal of cases.”
81. We would now examine the principles of separability and competence-competence. Clauses (a)
and (b) to sub-section (1) to Section 16 enact the principle of separation of the arbitration agreement
from the underlying or container contract. Clause (a), by legal fiction, gives an independent status to
an arbitration clause as if it is a standalone agreement, even when it is only a clause and an integral
part of the underlying or container contract. Clause (b) formulates a legal rule that a decision by the
arbitral tribunal holding that the main contract is null and void shall not ipso jure entail invalidity of
the arbitration clause. Successful challenge to the existence or invalidity or rescission of the main
contract does not necessarily embrace an identical finding as to the arbitration agreement, provided
the court is satisfied that the arbitration clause had been agreed upon. The arbitration agreement
can be avoided only on the ground which relates directly to the arbitration agreement.
Notwithstanding the challenge to the underlying or container contract, the arbitration clause in the
underlying or container contract survives for determining the disputes. The principle prevents
boot-strapping as it is primarily for the arbitral tribunal and not for the court to decide issues of
existence, validity and rescission of the underlying contract. Principle of separation authorises an
arbitral tribunal to rule and decide on the existence, validity or rescission of the underlying contract
without an earlier adjudication of the questions by the referral court.
82. An interesting and relevant exposition, when assertions claiming repudiation, rescission or
‘accord and satisfaction’ are made by a party opposing reference, is to found in Damodar Valley
Corporation v. K.K. Kar,66 which had referred to an earlier judgment of this Court in Union of India
v. Kishorilal Gupta & Bros.,67 to observe:
“11. After a review of the relevant case law, Subba Rao, J., as he then was, speaking
for the majority enunciated the following principles: “(1) An arbitration clause is a
collateral term of a contract as distinguished from its substantive terms; but none the
less it is an integral part of it; (2) however comprehensive the terms of an arbitration
clause may be, the existence of the contract is a necessary condition for its operation;
it perishes with the contract; (3) the contract may be non est in the sense that it never
came legally into existence or it was void ab initio; (4) though the contract was validly
executed, the parties may put an end to it as if it had never existed and substitute a
new contract for it solely governing their rights and liabilities thereunder; (5) in the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
57

former case, if the original contract has no legal existence, the arbitration clause also
cannot operate, for along with the original contract, it is also void; in the latter case,
as the original contract is extinguished by the substituted one, the arbitration clause
of the original contract perishes with it; and (6) between the two falls many
categories “of disputes in connection with a contract, such as the question of
repudiation, frustration, breach etc. In those cases it is the performance of the
contract that has come to an end, but the contract is still in existence for certain
purposes in respect of disputes arising under it or in connection with it. As the
contract subsists for certain 66 (1974) 1 SCC 141 67 AIR 1959 SC 1362 purposes, the
arbitration clause operates in respect of these purposes.” In those cases, as we have
stated earlier, it is the performance of the contract that has come to an end but the
contract is still in existence for certain purposes in respect of disputes arising under it
or in connection with it. We think as the contract subsists for certain purposes, the
arbitration clause operates in respect of these purposes.” Reference was also made to
the minority judgment of Sarkar, J. in Kishorilal Gupta & Bros. to observe that he had
only disagreed with the majority on the effect of settlement on the arbitration clause,
as he had held that arbitration clause did survive to settle the dispute as to whether
there was or was not an ‘accord and satisfaction’. It was further observed that this
principle laid down by Sarkar, J. that ‘accord and satisfaction’ does not put an end to
the arbitration clause, was not disagreed to by the majority.
On the other hand, proposition (6) seems to be laying the weight on to the views of Sarkar, J. These
decisions were under the Arbitration Act,1940. The Arbitration Act specifically incorporates
principles of separation and competence-competence and empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule on
its own jurisdiction.
83. Principles of competence-competence have positive and negative connotations. As a positive
implication, the arbitral tribunals are declared competent and authorised by law to rule as to their
jurisdiction and decide non-arbitrability questions. In case of expressed negative effect, the statute
would govern and should be followed. Implied negative effect curtails and constrains interference by
the court at the referral stage by necessary implication in order to allow the arbitral tribunal to rule
as to their jurisdiction and decide non-arbitrability questions. As per the negative effect, courts at
the referral stage are not to decide on merits, except when permitted by the legislation either
expressly or by necessary implication, such questions of non-arbitrability. Such prioritisation of
arbitral tribunal over the courts can be partial and limited when the legislation provides for some or
restricted scrutiny at the ‘first look’ referral stage. We would, therefore, examine the principles of
competence-competence with reference to the legislation, that is, the Arbitration Act.
84. Section 16(1) of the Arbitration Act accepts and empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own
jurisdiction including a ruling on the objections, with respect to all aspects of non-arbitrability
including validity of the arbitration agreement. A party opposing arbitration, as per sub-section (2),
should raise the objection to jurisdiction of the tribunal before the arbitral tribunal, not later than
the submission of statement of defence. However, participation in the appointment procedure or
appointing an arbitrator would not preclude and prejudice any party from raising an objection to the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
58

jurisdiction. Obviously, the intent is to curtail delay and expedite appointment of the arbitral
tribunal. The clause also indirectly accepts that appointment of an arbitrator is different from the
issue and question of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability. As per sub-section (3), any objection that
the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority should be raised as soon as the matter
arises. However, the arbitral tribunal, as per sub-section (4), is empowered to admit a plea
regarding lack of jurisdiction beyond the periods specified in sub-section (2) and (3) if it considers
that the delay is justified. As per the mandate of sub-section (5) when objections to the jurisdiction
under sub-sections (2) and (3) are rejected, the arbitral tribunal can continue with the proceedings
and pass the arbitration award. A party aggrieved is at liberty to file an application for setting aside
such arbitral award under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. Sub-section (3) to Section 8 in specific
terms permits an arbitral tribunal to continue with the arbitration proceeding and make an award,
even when an application under sub-section (1) to Section 8 is pending consideration of the
court/forum. Therefore, pendency of the judicial proceedings even before the court is not by itself a
bar for the arbitral tribunal to proceed and make an award. Whether the court should stay arbitral
proceedings or appropriate deference by the arbitral tribunal are distinctly different aspects and not
for us to elaborate in the present reference.
85. Section 34 of the Act is applicable at the third stage post the award when an application is filed
for setting aside the award. Under Section 34, an award can be set aside – (i) if the arbitration
agreement is not valid as per law to which the party is subject; (ii) if the award deals with the
disputes not contemplated by or not falling within the submission to arbitration, or contains a
decision on the matter beyond the scope of submission to arbitration; and
(iii) when the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law
for the time being in force. Thus, the competence - competence principle, in its negative effect,
leaves the door open for the parties to challenge the findings of the arbitral tribunal on the three
issues. The negative effect does not provide absolute authority, but only a priority to the arbitral
tribunal to rule the jurisdiction on the three issues. The courts have a ‘second look’ on the three
aspects under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.68
86. The courts at the referral stage do not perform ministerial functions. They exercise and perform
judicial functions when they decide objections in terms of Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act.
Section 8 prescribes the courts to refer the parties to arbitration, if the action brought is the subject
of an arbitration agreement, unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists.
Examining the term ‘prima facie’, in Nirmala J. Jhala v. State of Gujarat and Another,69 this Court
had noted:
“48. A prima facie case does not mean a case proved to the hilt but a case which can
be said to be established if the evidence which is led in support of the case were [to
be] believed. While determining whether a prima facie case had been made out or not
the relevant consideration is whether on the evidence led it was possible to arrive at
the conclusion in question and not whether that was the only conclusion which could
be arrived at on that evidence.” Prima facie case in the context of Section 8 is not to
be confused with the merits of the case put up by the parties which has to be
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
59

established before the arbitral tribunal. It is restricted to the subject matter of the suit
being prima facie arbitrable under a 68 The nature and extent of power of judicial
review under Section 34 has not been examined and answered in this reference.
69 (2013) 4 SCC 301 valid arbitration agreement. Prima facie case means that the
assertions on these aspects are bona fide. When read with the principles of separation
and competence-competence and Section 34 of the Arbitration Act, referral court
without getting bogged-down would compel the parties to abide unless there are good
and substantial reasons to the contrary.70
87. Prima facie examination is not full review but a primary first review to weed out manifestly and
ex facie non-existent and invalid arbitration agreements and non-arbitrable disputes. The prima
facie review at the reference stage is to cut the deadwood and trim off the side branches in straight
forward cases where dismissal is barefaced and pellucid and when on the facts and law the litigation
must stop at the first stage. Only when the court is certain that no valid arbitration agreement exists
or the disputes/subject matter are not arbitrable, the application under Section 8 would be rejected.
At this stage, the court should not get lost in thickets and decide debatable questions of facts.
Referral proceedings are 70 The European Convention on International Commercial Arbitration
appears to recognise the prima facie test in Article VI (3):
“Where either party to an arbitration agreement has initiated arbitration proceedings
before any resort is had to a court, courts of Contracting States subsequently asked to
deal with the same subject-matter between the same parties or with the question
whether the arbitration agreement was non-existent or null and void or had lapsed,
shall stay their ruling on the arbitrator’s jurisdiction until the arbitral award is made,
unless they have good and substantial reasons to the contrary.” preliminary and
summary and not a mini trial. This necessarily reflects on the nature of the
jurisdiction exercised by the court and in this context, the observations of B.N.
Srikrishna, J. of ‘plainly arguable’ case in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. are of
importance and relevance. Similar views are expressed by this Court in Vimal Kishore
Shah wherein the test applied at the pre-arbitration stage was whether there is a
“good arguable case” for the existence of an arbitration agreement. The test of “good
arguable case” has been elaborated by the England and Wales High Court in Silver
Dry Bulk Company Limited v. Homer Hulbert Maritime Company Limited,71 in the
following words:
“Good arguable case” is an expression which has been hallowed by long usage, but it
means different things in different contexts. For the purpose of an application under
Section 18, I would hold that what must be shown is a case which is somewhat more
than merely arguable, but need not be one which appears more likely than not to
succeed. It shall use the term “good arguable case” in that sense. It represents a
relatively low threshold which retains flexibility for the Court to do what is just, while
excluding those cases where the jurisdictional merits were so low that reluctant
respondents ought not to be put to the expense and trouble of having to decide how
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
60

to deal with arbitral proceedings where it was very likely that the tribunal had no
jurisdiction. In this connection it is important to remember that crossing the
threshold of “good arguable case” means that the Court has power to make one of the
orders listed in
71 (2017) EWHC 44 (Comm.) Section 18(3). It remains for consideration whether it should do so as
a matter of discretion.” Appropriate at this stage would be a reference to the judgment of the Delhi
High Court in NCC Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.,72 wherein it has been held as under:
“59.1 In my view, the scope of examination as to whether or not the claims lodged are
Notified Claims has narrowed down considerably in view of the language of Section
11(6A) of the 1996 Act. To my mind, once the Court is persuaded that it has
jurisdiction to entertain a Section 11 petition all that is required to examine is as to
whether or not an arbitration agreement exists between the parties which is relatable
to the dispute at hand. The latter part of the exercise adverted to above, which
involves correlating the dispute with the arbitration agreement obtaining between the
parties, is an aspect which is implicitly embedded in sub-section (6A) of Section 11 of
the 1996 Act, which, otherwise, requires the Court to confine its examination only to
the existence of the arbitration agreement. Therefore, if on a bare perusal of the
agreement it is found that a particular dispute is not relatable to the arbitration
agreement, then, perhaps, the Court may decline the relief sought for by a party in a
Section 11 petition. However, if there is a contestation with regard to the issue as to
whether the dispute falls within the realm of the arbitration agreement, then, the best
course would be to allow the arbitrator to form a view in the matter.
59.2 Thus, unless it is in a manner of speech, a chalk and cheese situation or a black
and white situation without shades of grey, the concerned court hearing the Section
11 petition should follow the more conservative course of allowing parties to have
their say before the arbitral tribunal.”
72 Arbitration Petition No. 115 of 2018, decided on 08.02.2019
88. The nature and facet of non-arbitrability could also determine the level and nature of scrutiny by
the court at the referral stage. Stravos Brekoulakis has differentiated between contractual aspects of
arbitration agreement which the court can examine at referral stage and jurisdictional aspects of
arbitration agreement which he feels should be left to the arbitral tribunal. John J. Barcelo III,
referring to some American decisions had divided the issue of non-arbitrability into procedural and
substantive objections. The procedurals are ‘gateway questions’ which would presumptively be for
the arbitrator to decide at least at the first stage. In the Indian context, we would respectfully adopt
the three categories in Boghara Polyfab Private Limited. The first category of issues, namely,
whether the party has approached the appropriate High Court, whether there is an arbitration
agreement and whether the party who has applied for reference is party to such agreement would be
subject to more thorough examination in comparison to the second and third categories/issues
which are presumptively, save in exceptional cases, for the arbitrator to decide. In the first category,
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
61

we would add and include the question or issue relating to whether the cause of action relates to
action in personam or rem; whether the subject matter of the dispute affects third party rights, have
erga omnes effect, requires centralized adjudication; whether the subject matter relates to
inalienable sovereign and public interest functions of the State; and whether the subject matter of
dispute is expressly or by necessary implication non-arbitrable as per mandatory statue(s). Such
questions arise rarely and, when they arise, are on most occasions questions of law. On the other
hand, issues relating to contract formation, existence, validity and non-arbitrability would be
connected and intertwined with the issues underlying the merits of the respective disputes/claims.
They would be factual and disputed and for the arbitral tribunal to decide. We would not like be too
prescriptive, albeit observe that the court may for legitimate reasons, to prevent wastage of public
and private resources, can exercise judicial discretion to conduct an intense yet summary prima
facie review while remaining conscious that it is to assist the arbitration procedure and not usurp
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Undertaking a detailed full review or a long-drawn review at the
referral stage would obstruct and cause delay undermining the integrity and efficacy of arbitration
as a dispute resolution mechanism. Conversely, if the court becomes too reluctant to intervene, it
may undermine effectiveness of both the arbitration and the court. There are certain cases where the
prima facie examination may require a deeper consideration. The court’s challenge is to find the
right amount of and the context when it would examine the prima facie case or exercise restraint.
The legal order needs a right balance between avoiding arbitration obstructing tactics at referral
stage and protecting parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is clearly non-arbitrable.
73
89. Accordingly, when it appears that prima facie review would be inconclusive, or on consideration
inadequate as it requires detailed examination, the matter should be left for final determination by
the arbitral tribunal selected by the parties by consent. The underlying rationale being not to delay
or defer and to discourage parties from using referral proceeding as a rue to delay and obstruct. In
such cases a full review by the courts at this stage would encroach on the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal and violate the legislative scheme allocating jurisdiction between the courts and the arbitral
tribunal. Centralisation of litigation with the arbitral tribunal as the primary and first adjudicator is
beneficent as it helps in quicker and efficient resolution of disputes.
73 Ozlem Susler – ‘The English Approach to Competence-Competence’
90. The Court would exercise discretion and refer the disputes to arbitration when it is satisfied that
the contest requires the arbitral tribunal should first decide the disputes and rule on non-
arbitrability. Similarly, discretion should be exercised when the party opposing arbitration is
adopting delaying tactics and impairing the referral proceedings. Appropriate in this regard, are
observations of the Supreme Court of Canada in Dell Computer Corporation v. Union des
consommateurs and Olivier Dumoulin,74 which read:
“85. If the challenge requires the production and review of factual evidence, the court
should normally refer the case to arbitration, as arbitrators have, for this purpose, the
same resources and expertise as courts. Where questions of mixed law and fact are
concerned, the court hearing the referral application must refer the case to
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
62

arbitration unless the questions of fact require only superficial consideration of the
documentary evidence in the record.
86. Before departing from the general rule of referral, the court must be satisfied that
the challenge to the arbitrator’s jurisdiction is not a delaying tactic and that it will not
unduly impair the conduct of the arbitration proceeding. This means that even when
considering one of the exceptions, the court might decide that to allow the arbitrator
to rule first on his or her competence would be best for the arbitration process.”
Judgment in Dell’s case has been elucidated and diluted by the Supreme Court of
Canada in TELUS Communications Inc. v.
74 [2007] 2 S.C.R. 801, 2007 SCC 34 Avraham Wellman, viz. interpretation of
Section 7(5) of the Arbitration Act, 1991, an aspect with which we are not concerned.
91. We would now examine Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. As noticed above sub-section (6-A) was
inserted by the Act 3 of 2016 with retrospective effect from 23rd October, 2015 and omitted by Act
33 of 2019. Section 11 (6) requires the court to appoint an arbitrator on an application made by a
party. Section (6-A) to Section 11 stipulates that the court shall, at the stage of appointment under
sub-section (4), (5) or (6), confine itself to the examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement. Sub- section (6-A) was omitted by Act 33 of 2019, but the omission is in view of the
introduction of a new regime of institutionalised arbitration as per the report of the committee
headed by Justice B. N. Srikrishna, dated 30.07.2017 which records for the reason of recommending
the omission as:
“Thus, it can be seen that after the Amendment Act of 2019, Section 11 (6-A) has been
omitted because appointment of arbitrators is to be done institutionally, in which
case the Supreme Court or the High Court under the old statutory regime are no
longer required to appoint arbitrators and consequently to determine whether an
arbitration agreement exists.” As observed earlier, Patel Engineering Ltd. explains
and holds that Sections 8 and 11 are complementary in nature as both relate to
reference to arbitration. Section 8 applies when judicial proceeding is pending and an
application is filed for stay of judicial proceeding and for reference to arbitration.
Amendments to Section 8 vide Act 3 of 2016 have not been omitted. Section 11 covers
the situation where the parties approach a court for appointment of an arbitrator.
Mayavati Trading Private Ltd., in our humble opinion, rightly holds that Patel
Engineering Ltd. has been legislatively overruled and hence would not apply even
post omission of sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
Mayavati Trading Private Ltd. has elaborated upon the object and purposes and
history of the amendment to Section 11, with reference to sub-section (6-A) to
elucidate that the Section, as originally enacted, was facsimile with Article 11 of the
UNCITRAL Model of law of arbitration on which the Arbitration Act was drafted and
enacted. Referring to the legislative scheme of Section 11, different interpretations,
and the Law Commission’s Reports, it has been held that the omitted sub-section
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
63

(6-A) to Section 11 of the Arbitration Act would continue to apply and guide the
courts on its scope of jurisdiction at stage one, that is the pre-arbitration stage.
Omission of sub-section (6-A) by Act 33 of 2019 was with the specific object and
purpose and is relatable to by substitution of sub-sections (12), (13) and (14) to
Section 11 of the Arbitration Act by Act 33 of 2019, which, vide sub-section (3A)
stipulates that the High Court and this court shall have the power to designate the
arbitral institutions which have been so graded by the Council under Section 43-I,
provided where a graded arbitral institution is not available, the concerned High
Court shall maintain a panel of arbitrators for discharging the function and
thereupon the High Court shall perform the duty of an arbitral institution for
reference to the arbitral tribunal. Therefore, it would be wrong to accept that post
omission of sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 the ratio in Patel Engineering Ltd. would
become applicable.
92. We now proceed to examine the question, whether the word ‘existence’ in Section 11 merely
refers to contract formation (whether there is an arbitration agreement) and excludes the question
of enforcement (validity) and therefore the latter falls outside the jurisdiction of the court at the
referral stage. On jurisprudentially and textualism it is possible to differentiate between existence of
an arbitration agreement and validity of an arbitration agreement. Such interpretation can draw
support from the plain meaning of the word “existence’. However, it is equally possible,
jurisprudentially and on contextualism, to hold that an agreement has no existence if it is not
enforceable and not binding. Existence of an arbitration agreement presupposes a valid agreement
which would be enforced by the court by relegating the parties to arbitration. Legalistic and plain
meaning interpretation would be contrary to the contextual background including the definition
clause and would result in unpalatable consequences. A reasonable and just interpretation of
‘existence’ requires understanding the context, the purpose and the relevant legal norms applicable
for a binding and enforceable arbitration agreement. An agreement evidenced in writing has no
meaning unless the parties can be compelled to adhere and abide by the terms. A party cannot sue
and claim rights based on an unenforceable document. Thus, there are good reasons to hold that an
arbitration agreement exists only when it is valid and legal. A void and unenforceable understanding
is no agreement to do anything. Existence of an arbitration agreement means an arbitration
agreement that meets and satisfies the statutory requirements of both the Arbitration Act and the
Contract Act and when it is enforceable in law. We would proceed to elaborate and give further
reasons:
(i) In Garware Wall Ropes Ltd., this Court had examined the question of stamp duty
in an underlying contract with an arbitration clause and in the context had drawn a
distinction between the first and second part of Section 7(2) of the Arbitration Act,
albeit the observations made and quoted above with reference to ‘existence’ and
‘validity’ of the arbitration agreement being apposite and extremely important, we
would repeat the same by reproducing paragraph 29 thereof:
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
64

“29. This judgment in Hyundai Engg. case is important in that what was specifically
under consideration was an arbitration clause which would get activated only if an
insurer admits or accepts liability. Since on facts it was found that the insurer
repudiated the claim, though an arbitration clause did “exist”, so to speak, in the
policy, it would not exist in law, as was held in that judgment, when one important
fact is introduced, namely, that the insurer has not admitted or accepted liability.
Likewise, in the facts of the present case, it is clear that the arbitration clause that is
contained in the sub- contract would not “exist” as a matter of law until the
sub-contract is duly stamped, as has been held by us above. The argument that
Section 11(6-A) deals with “existence”, as opposed to Section 8, Section 16 and
Section 45, which deal with “validity” of an arbitration agreement is answered by this
Court's understanding of the expression “existence” in Hyundai Engg. case, as
followed by us.”;
Existence and validity are intertwined, and arbitration agreement does not exist if it is illegal or does
not satisfy mandatory legal requirements. Invalid agreement is no agreement.
(ii) The court at the reference stage exercises judicial powers. ‘Examination’, as an ordinary
expression in common parlance, refers to an act of looking or considering something carefully in
order to discover something (as per Cambridge Dictionary). It requires the person to inspect closely,
to test the condition of, or to inquire into carefully (as per Merriam- Webster Dictionary). It would
be rather odd for the court to hold and say that the arbitration agreement exists, though ex facie and
manifestly the arbitration agreement is invalid in law and the dispute in question is non-arbitrable.
The court is not powerless and would not act beyond jurisdiction, if it rejects an application for
reference, when the arbitration clause is admittedly or without doubt is with a minor, lunatic or the
only claim seeks a probate of a Will.
(iii) Most scholars and jurists accept and agree that the existence and validity of an arbitration
agreement are the same. Even Starvos Brekoulakis accepts that validity, in terms of substantive and
formal validity, are questions of contract and hence for the court to examine.
(iv) Most jurisdictions accept and require prima facie review by the court on non-arbitrability
aspects at the referral stage.
(v) Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act are complementary provisions as was held in Patel
Engineering Ltd.. The object and purpose behind the two provisions is identical to compel and force
parties to abide by their contractual understanding. This being so, the two provisions should be read
as laying down similar standard and not as laying down different and separate parameters. Section
11 does not prescribe any standard of judicial review by the court for determining whether an
arbitration agreement is in existence. Section 8 states that the judicial review at the stage of
reference is prima facie and not final. Prima facie standard equally applies when the power of
judicial review is exercised by the court under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. Therefore, we can
read the mandate of valid arbitration agreement in Section 8 into mandate of Section 11, that is,
‘existence of an arbitration agreement’.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
65

(vi) Exercise of power of prima facie judicial review of existence as including validity is justified as a
court is the first forum that examines and decides the request for the referral.
Absolute “hands off” approach would be counterproductive and harm arbitration, as an alternative
dispute resolution mechanism. Limited, yet effective intervention is acceptable as it does not
obstruct but effectuates arbitration.
(vii) Exercise of the limited prima facie review does not in any way interfere with the principle of
competence– competence and separation as to obstruct arbitration proceedings but ensures that
vexatious and frivolous matters get over at the initial stage.
(viii) Exercise of prima facie power of judicial review as to the validity of the arbitration agreement
would save costs and check harassment of objecting parties when there is clearly no justification and
a good reason not to accept plea of non-arbitrability. In Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of India,75 this
Court has observed:
“191. The Indian judicial system is grossly afflicted with frivolous litigation. Ways and
means need to be evolved to deter litigants from their compulsive obsession towards
senseless and ill-considered claims. One needs to keep in mind that in the process of
litigation, there is an innocent sufferer on the other side of every irresponsible and
senseless claim. He suffers long-drawn anxious periods of nervousness and
restlessness, whilst the litigation is pending 75 (2014) 8 SCC 470 without any fault on
his part. He pays for the litigation from out of his savings (or out of his borrowings)
worrying that the other side may trick him into defeat for no fault of his. He spends
invaluable time briefing counsel and preparing them for his claim. Time which he
should have spent at work, or with his family, is lost, for no fault of his. Should a
litigant not be compensated for what he has lost for no fault? The suggestion to the
legislature is that a litigant who has succeeded must be compensated by the one who
has lost. The suggestion to the legislature is to formulate a mechanism that anyone
who initiates and continues a litigation senselessly pays for the same.
It is suggested that the legislature should consider the introduction of a “Code of Compulsory Costs”.
(ix) Even in Duro Felguera, Kurian Joseph, J., in paragraph 52, had referred to Section 7(5) and
thereafter in paragraph 53 referred to a judgment of this Court in M.R. Engineers and Contractors
Private Limited v. Som Datt Builders Limited76 to observe that the analysis in the said case supports
the final conclusion that the Memorandum of Understanding in the said case did not incorporate an
arbitration clause. Thereafter, reference was specifically made to Patel Engineering Ltd. and
Boghara Polyfab Private Limited to observe that the legislative policy is essential to minimise court’s
interference at the pre-arbitral stage and this was the intention of sub-section (6) to Section 11 of the
Arbitration Act. Paragraph 48 in Duro Felguera 76 (2009) 7 SCC 696 specifically states that the
resolution has to exist in the arbitration agreement, and it is for the court to see if the agreement
contains a clause which provides for arbitration of disputes which have arisen between the parties.
Paragraph 59 is more restrictive and requires the court to see whether an arbitration agreement
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
66

exists – nothing more, nothing less. Read with the other findings, it would be appropriate to read
the two paragraphs as laying down the legal ratio that the court is required to see if the underlying
contract contains an arbitration clause for arbitration of the disputes which have arisen between the
parties - nothing more, nothing less. Reference to decisions in Patel Engineering Ltd. and Boghara
Polyfab Private Limited was to highlight that at the reference stage, post the amendments vide Act 3
of 2016, the court would not go into and finally decide different aspects that were highlighted in the
two decisions.
(x) In addition to Garware Wall Ropes Limited case, this Court in Narbheram Power and Steel
Private Limited and Hyundai Engg. & Construction Co. Ltd., both decisions of three Judges, has
rejected the application for reference in the insurance contracts holding that the claim was beyond
and not covered by the arbitration agreement. The court felt that the legal position was beyond
doubt as the scope of the arbitration clause was fully covered by the dictum in Vulcan Insurance Co.
Ltd. Similarly, in M/s. PSA Mumbai Investments PTE. Limited, this Court at the referral stage came
to the conclusion that the arbitration clause would not be applicable and govern the disputes.
Accordingly, the reference to the arbitral tribunal was set aside leaving the respondent to pursue its
claim before an appropriate forum.
(xi) The interpretation appropriately balances the allocation of the decision-making authority
between the court at the referral stage and the arbitrators’ primary jurisdiction to decide disputes on
merits. The court as the judicial forum of the first instance can exercise prima facie test jurisdiction
to screen and knockdown ex facie meritless, frivolous and dishonest litigation. Limited jurisdiction
of the courts ensures expeditious, alacritous and efficient disposal when required at the referral
stage.
93. Section 43(1) of the Arbitration Act states that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to
arbitrations as it applies to court proceedings. Sub-section (2) states that for the purposes of the
Arbitration Act and Limitation Act, arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the date
referred to in Section
21. Limitation law is procedural and normally disputes, being factual, would be for the arbitrator to
decide guided by the facts found and the law applicable. The court at the referral stage can interfere
only when it is manifest that the claims are ex facie time barred and dead, or there is no subsisting
dispute. All other cases should be referred to the arbitral tribunal for decision on merits. Similar
would be the position in case of disputed ‘no claim certificate’ or defence on the plea of novation and
‘accord and satisfaction’. As observed in Premium Nafta Products Ltd., it is not to be expected that
commercial men while entering transactions inter se would knowingly create a system which would
require that the court should first decide whether the contract should be rectified or avoided or
rescinded, as the case may be, and then if the contract is held to be valid, it would require the
arbitrator to resolve the issues that have arisen.
94. We would also resolve the question of principles applicable to interpretation of an arbitration
clause. This is important and directly relates to scope of the arbitration agreement. In Premium
Nafta Products Ltd., on the question of interpretation and construction of an arbitration clause, it is
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
67

observed:
“In approaching the question of construction, it is therefore necessary to inquire into
the purpose of the arbitration clause. As to this, I think there can be no doubt. The
parties have entered into a relationship, an agreement or what is alleged to be an
agreement or what appears on its face to be an agreement, which may give rise to
disputes. They want those disputes decided by a tribunal which they have chosen,
commonly on the grounds of such matters as its neutrality, expertise and privacy, the
availability of legal services at the seat of the arbitration and the unobtrusive
efficiency of its supervisory law. Particularly in the case of international contracts,
they want a quick and efficient adjudication and do not want to take the risks of delay
and, in too many cases, partiality, in proceedings before a national jurisdiction.” In
Narbheram Power and Steel Private Ltd., this Court while dealing with the
arbitration clause in the insurance agreement, has held that the arbitration clause
should be strictly construed, relying on the principles of strict interpretation that
apply to insurance contracts. These observations have been repeated in other cases.
What is true and applicable for men of commerce and business may not be equally
true and apply in case of laymen and to those who are not fully aware of the effect of
an arbitration clause or had little option but to sign on the standard form contract.
Broad or narrow interpretations of an arbitration agreement can, to a great extent,
effect coverage of a retroactive arbitration agreement. Pro-arbitration broad
interpretation, normally applied to international instruments, and commercial
transactions is based upon the approach that the arbitration clause should be
considered as per the true contractual language and what it says, but in case of doubt
as to whether related or close disputes in the course of parties’ business relationship
is covered by the clause, the assumption is that such disputes are encompassed by the
agreement. The restrictive interpretation approach on the other hand states that in
case of doubt the disputes shall not be treated as covered by the clause. Narrow
approach is based on the reason that the arbitration should be viewed as an exception
to the court or judicial system. The third approach is to avoid either broad or
restrictive interpretation and instead the intention of the parties as to scope of the
clause is understood by considering the strict language and circumstance of the case
in hand. Terms like ‘all’, ‘any’, ‘in respect of’, ‘arising out of’ etc. can expand the scope
and ambit of the arbitration clause. Connected and incidental matters, unless the
arbitration clause suggests to the contrary, would normally be covered.
Which approach as to interpretation of an arbitration agreement should be adopted
in a particular case would depend upon various factors including the language, the
parties, nature of relationship, the factual background in which the arbitration
agreement was entered, etc. In case of pure commercial disputes, more appropriate
principle of interpretation would be the one of liberal construction as there is a
presumption in favour of one-stop adjudication.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
68

95. Accordingly, we hold that the expression ‘existence of an arbitration agreement’ in Section 11 of
the Arbitration Act, would include aspect of validity of an arbitration agreement, albeit the court at
the referral stage would apply the prima facie test on the basis of principles set out in this judgment.
In cases of debatable and disputable facts, and good reasonable arguable case, etc., the court would
force the parties to abide by the arbitration agreement as the arbitral tribunal has primary
jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes including the question of jurisdiction and
non-arbitrability.
96. Discussion under the heading ‘Who decides Arbitrability?’ can be crystallized as under:
(a) Ratio of the decision in Patel Engineering Ltd.
on the scope of judicial review by the court while deciding an application under Sections 8 or 11 of
the Arbitration Act, post the amendments by Act 3 of 2016 (with retrospective effect from
23.10.2015) and even post the amendments vide Act 33 of 2019 (with effect from 09.08.2019), is no
longer applicable.
(b) Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court under Section 8 and 11 of the Arbitration
Act is identical but extremely limited and restricted.
(c) The general rule and principle, in view of the legislative mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and
Act 33 of 2019, and the principle of severability and competence-competence, is that the arbitral
tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine and decide all questions of non-arbitrability.
The court has been conferred power of “second look” on aspects of non- arbitrability post the award
in terms of sub-clauses (i),
(ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a) or sub-clause (i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act.
(d) Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at the Section 8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly
and ex facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non- existent, invalid or the disputes are
non-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability would, to some extent, determine
the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The restricted and limited review is to check and protect
parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably ‘non-arbitrable’ and to cut
off the deadwood. The court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating to
non-arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings would be
insufficient and inconclusive; when facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts
delaying tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to
enter into a mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal but
to affirm and uphold integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism.
97. Reference is, accordingly, answered.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
69

98. In view of the aforesaid findings and ratio, we dispose of the Civil Appeal and the Special Leave
Petitions in the following manner:
In view of the fact that the Arbitral Tribunal is hearing the matter, we leave the issue
of arbitrability to the Tribunal to decide and come to a conclusion on the same.
Further, the parties are at liberty to execute or challenge the award in accordance
with law.
The direction that the award cannot be executed without applying for permission of
this Court is hereby vacated.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 5605-5606 of 2019 In this case, arbitral award has
been passed on 24 th August 2019. It is apprised before this Bench that the Arbitral
Tribunal has rejected the objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In this view, the
petitioner is at liberty to pursue the remedy available under Section 34 of the
Arbitration Act.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 11877 of 2020 In view of the fact that the Arbitral Tribunal is
hearing the matter, we leave the issue of arbitrability to the Tribunal to decide and come to a
conclusion on the same. Further, the parties are at liberty to challenge the award if they are not
satisfied with the same in this regard.
......................................J. (N.V. RAMANA) ......................................J. (SANJIV KHANNA)
......................................J. (KRISHNA MURARI) NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 14, 2020.
                                       Reportable
           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2402 OF 2019
VIDYA DROLIA & ORS.                       ...APPELLANTS
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
70

                         VERSUS
DURGA TRADING CORPORATION                 …RESPONDENT
                          WITH
              SLP (C) 5605−5606 OF 2019
LINDSAY INTERNATIONAL PVT. LTD.           ...PETITIONER
                         VERSUS
IFGL REFRACTORIES LIMITED                 …RESPONDENT
               SLP (C) NO. 11877 OF 2020
       (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 40679 of 2019)
CREATIVE INFOCITY LTD.                    ...PETITIONER
                          VERSUS
GUJARAT INFORMATICS LTD.                      …RESPONDENT
                     JUDGMENT
 N. V. RAMANA, J.
1. I have had the advantage of reading in advance the opinion of my learned Brother Justice Sanjiv
Khanna. The present matters deal with a very important aspect in the arbitration jurisprudence in
this country, which necessitate a separate opinion.
2. Recently, Mr. Fali S. Nariman, in one of his lectures had alluded that the development of
arbitration in India is not attributable to the success in arbitration, rather to the failures of the
Court. This reflects an uncomfortable relationship which arbitration has had with litigation all these
days. The judicial hesitancy of the courts to be more accommodative towards the tribunal and the
need for respecting arbitral awards requires this Court to extensively reflect and bring the Court’s
jurisprudence in tune with the liberal intention sought to be furthered post the 2015 amendment to
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”).
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
71

3. Before we delve into the merits of the matters, we need to have a brief reference to the facts which
are necessary for the disposal of these cases. As all the cases are similar, we take facts from Civil
Appeal No. 2402 of 2019, to indicate the history of this litigation and the questions which arise from
the same. In the year 2006, appellants (tenants) entered into a tenancy agreement with the
predecessor title holder with respect to certain buildings. Clause 23 of the agreement contained a
dispute resolution clause. In the year 2012, the tenancy was attorned to the respondent, after which
the appellants started paying monthly rent to the respondent (landlord). On 24.08.2015, the
respondent (landlord) wrote a letter seeking vacant possession of the property as the period of lease
was expiring on 01.02.2016. Appellants (tenants) did not vacate. Aggrieved, the respondent
(landlord) invoked the arbitration under the dispute resolution mechanism provided under the
contract. On 28.04.2016, the respondent filed the present Section 11 petition before the Calcutta
High Court for appointment of an arbitrator. On 07.09.2016, the High Court passed the impugned
order appointing an arbitrator, after rejecting the appellants objections on the arbitrability of the
dispute.
4. Aggrieved by the same, the appellants (tenants) have approached this Court in the present
proceedings, on the reason that, after the judgment of the High Court was rendered appointing the
arbitrator, this Court in Himangni Enterprises v. Kamaljeet Singh Ahluwalia, (2017) 10 SCC 706
[hereinafter referred as ‘Himangni Enterprises’] held that where the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
applied between the landlord and tenant disputes between the said parties would not be arbitrable.
5. When Civil Appeal No. 2402 of 2019 was listed for hearing on 28.02.2019, then the said matter
was referred to a three− Judge Bench, with following observations:
“7. It will be noticed that “validity” of an arbitration agreement is, therefore, apart
from its “existence”. One moot question that therefore, arises, and which needs to be
authoritatively decided by a Bench of three learned Judges, is whether the word
“existence” would include weeding−out arbitration clauses in agreements which
indicate that the subject−matter is incapable of arbitration… xxxxx xxxxx
30. In this view of the matter, this case is referred to a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges.
31. Given the facts of this case and the fact that 18 hearings have been held, the stay
that has been granted to the arbitral proceedings by our order dated 13.08.2018 is
lifted, and the proceedings may go on and culminate in an award. The award cannot
be executed without applying to this Court. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.”
6. The reference order primarily indicates that there are two substantive issues to be settled by this
Court herein, namely:
I. To what extent does the Court decide the question of non−arbitrability under
Section 11 of the Act?
II. Whether tenancy disputes are capable of being resolved through arbitration?
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
72

7. Before we analyze the issue, we need to observe arguments canvassed by the counsel appearing
for the parties, who set the tone for these cases.
8. Learned senior counsel, Mr. K. V. Vishwanathan, appearing for the petitioners in SLP (C.) No.
5605−5606 of 2019, submitted as under:
ˆ That Section 11(6A) of the Act is a unique provision, which is neither traceable to
UNCITRAL Model Law nor any other domestic legislation.
ˆ In spite of the absence of legislative provision in other countries, Courts have
adjudicated on the existence of the arbitration agreement at the stage of the
appointment of the arbitrator itself. ˆ The standard of ‘good arguable case’ as
expounded in Noble Denton Middle East v. Noble Denton International Ltd., [2010]
EWHC 2574 (Comm.), should be applied by the Courts to examine the existence of a
valid arbitration agreement.
ˆ Therefore, the scope of judicial enquiry at the stage of reference/appointment is not
limited to the mere presence of the arbitration clause.
9. Learned Senior advocate, Mr. Nakul Dewan on behalf of the Respondent in SLP (C.) No. 5605−
5606 of 2019, argued that:
ˆ Section 11(6A) was a conscious departure from the earlier existing judicial
interpretation, which had widened the scope of judicial enquiry. ˆ The 246th Law
Commission Report stated that Section 11(6A) limits the scope of judicial enquiry to
determination of a prima facie existence. ˆ Word ‘existence’ under Section 11(6A)
means legally enforceable existence and not mere presence in the contract.
ˆ While examining the issue of existence in an application under Section 11, this
Court is merely functioning as an appointing authority.
10. Learned senior counsel, Mr. Manoj Swarup on behalf of the Petitioner in SLP (C.) No. 11877 of
2020, has submitted that:
ˆ Lease hold rights under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 [hereinafter referred to
as “TP Act”]are rights in rem.
ˆ A contractual tenant upon determination of lease becomes a statutory tenant and is
entitled to the statutory protection. Therefore, the arbitration in that case would be
ousted.
ˆ Section 11 is not the stage for determination of the issue of arbitrability in those
cases where the test of Section 89, CPC is to be applied.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
73

11. Learned senior counsel, Mr. Gopal Shankarnarayan on behalf of the Petitioners in SLP (C.) No.
5605−5606 of 2019, submitted that:
ˆ Section 11(6A) mandates an ‘examination of the evidence of an arbitration
agreement’. ˆ The 2015 Amendment does not convert the judicial power conferred in
Section 11(6) into an administrative power.
ˆ The decision in Mayavati Trading Pvt. Ltd. v.
         Pradyuat    Deb   Burman,    (2019)   8   SCC   714   is
         inapplicable.
12. Learned counsel, Mr. Sourav Agarwal on behalf of the Respondent in Civil Appeal
No. 2402 of 2019, contended that:
ˆ the Court under Section 8 and 11 of the Act, does not act as a mere post−office.
ˆ this is a case in which the appellants have participated in the arbitral proceedings.
ˆ Relying upon various judgments, including certain High Court judgments that were
passed after the judgment in Himangni Enterprises (supra) to state that, on facts,
Himangni Enterprises (supra) was wholly distinguishable as it did not apply to a
situation of a lease expiring by efflux of time.
ˆ certain High Court judgments had, after the judgment in Himangni Enterprises
(supra), distinguished the said judgment on this and other grounds. As an alternative
submission, he said that, in any case, Himangni Enterprises (supra) would require
reconsideration as it did not state the law correctly.
13. We answer the two questions in seriatim.
14. Arbitration is a creature of consensus. It is completely dependent on party
autonomy and the intention expressed in the agreement. A contract, having multiple
clauses including arbitration agreements, can be divided into two parts. The clauses
relating to the commercial relationship, i.e., the obligations and duties of each party,
can be referred to as the ‘main contract’. The arbitration agreement so to say is a
separate contract in itself.
15. The separability of the arbitration agreement from the main contract, historically
existed in Roman law. Since early times, arbitration was viewed with suspicion,
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
74

which allowed for the development of separability. Ironically, the ‘pro− arbitration’
function of separability in the present day is a late 19th and 20th century
development, traceable to Germanic and Swiss jurisprudence.
16. In India, arbitration was governed earlier by the Arbitration Act of 1899, and later
1940. Presently, arbitration is governed by the Act of 1996, with subsequent
amendments.
A cursory reading of the legislative history points to the fact that the intention of the legislature is to
make the regime ‘pro−arbitration’. Whenever this Court has afforded a contrary view, there has been
a trend to undo the changes to bring it in line with the international standards prevailing in certain
arbitration havens such as Singapore, London and Hong Kong.
17. Before we move to the analysis of the case, we need to briefly describe the structure of the
Arbitration Act, 1996 with subsequent amendments. The set−up of both international and domestic
arbitration is contained under PARTS I, IA and II of the Act. The preamble to the Act provides that
it was enacted with a view to have uniformity of the law of arbitral procedures to establish a fair and
efficient mechanism to resolve disputes.
18. Section 2 provides for the definition of ‘arbitration agreement’ which is to be interpreted in
terms of Section 7 of the Act, which states as under:
7. Arbitration agreement. — (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an
agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship,
whether contractual or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form
of a separate agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing. (4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is
contained in—
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication including
communication through electronic means which provide a record of the agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the agreement is
alleged by one party and not denied by the other. (5) The reference in a contract to a document
containing an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and
the reference is such as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
75

19. Section 5 emphasizes a very important principle, that judicial interference in arbitral
proceedings should be minimum and should be limited to instances where it is specifically provided
for under the Act. Although the provision envisages a wide amplitude, various judgments of this
Court have restricted the utility of same. [ICICI Bank Ltd. v. Sidco Leathers Ltd., (2006) 10 SCC
452]
20. Section 8 of the Act in its present and earlier form, are extracted below:
Section 8 prior to Section 8 after Act Section 8 after Act Act 3 of 2016 3 of 2016 33 of
2019 Power to refer parties to Power to refer Power to refer arbitration where parties
to parties to there is an arbitration where arbitration where arbitration there is an
there is an agreement.−(1) A arbitration arbitration judicial authority agreement.—(1)
A agreement.−(1) A before which an judicial authority, judicial authority, action is
brought in before which an before which an a matter which is action is brought in
action is brought in the subject of an a matter which is a matter which is arbitration
the subject of an the subject of an agreement shall, if a arbitration arbitration party so
applies not agreement shall, if a agreement shall, if a later than when party to the
party to the submitting his first arbitration arbitration statement on the agreement or
any agreement or any substance of the person claiming person claiming dispute, refer
the through or under through or under parties to him, so applies not him, so applies
not arbitration. later than the date of later than the date of submitting his first
submitting his first (2) The application statement on the statement on the referred to
in sub− substance of the substance of the section (1) shall not dispute, then, dispute,
then, be entertained notwithstanding any notwithstanding any unless it is judgment,
decree or judgment, decree or accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or
a duly order of the Supreme order of the Supreme certified copy Court or any Court,
Court or any Court, thereof. refer the parties to refer the parties to arbitration unless
it arbitration unless it (3) Notwithstanding finds that prima finds that prima that an
application facie no valid facie no valid has been made arbitration arbitration under
sub−section agreement exists. agreement exists.
(1) and that the                                   (2) The application
issue is pending (2) The application               referred to in sub−
before the judicial referred to in sub−            section (1) shall not
authority,         an section (1) shall not
                                                   be          entertained
arbitration may be be             entertained
                                                   unless         it      is
commenced          or unless         it      is
continued and an accompanied by the                accompanied by the
arbitral       award original      arbitration     original     arbitration
made.                 agreement or a duly          agreement or a duly
                      certified          copy      certified          copy
                      thereof:                     thereof:
                        Provided that where        Provided that where
                        the             original   the            original
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
76

                        arbitration                arbitration
                        agreement       or     a
                                                   agreement       or    a
                        certified copy thereof
                                                   certified copy thereof
                        is not available with
                        the party applying         is not available with
                        for     reference     to   the party applying
                        arbitration       under    for     reference    to
                        sub−section (1), and       arbitration      under
                        the said agreement         sub−section (1), and
                        or certified copy is       the said agreement
                        retained by the other      or certified copy is
                        party        to     that   retained by the other
                        agreement, then, the       party       to     that
                        party so applying          agreement, then, the
                        shall      file    such
                                                   party so applying
                        application       along
                                        shall     file   such
                with a copy of the      application     along
                arbitration             with a copy of the
                agreement and a
                                        arbitration
                petition praying the
                                        agreement and a
                Court to call upon
                                        petition praying the
                the other party to
                produce the original    Court to call upon
                arbitration             the other party to
                agreement     or its    produce the original
                duly certified copy     arbitration
                before that Court.      agreement or its
                                        duly certified copy
(3) Notwithstanding before that Court.
that an application has been made (3) Notwithstanding under sub−section (1) that an application
and that the issue is pending before the has been made judicial authority, an under sub−section (1)
arbitration may be and that the issue is commenced or pending before the continued and an judicial
authority, an arbitral award made arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral
award made.
Under the old Arbitration Act, 1940, the Court had the discretion in referring the parties to
arbitration, however such discretion is done away with after the coming into force of the 1996 Act.
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 does not, in specific terms, exclude any category of
disputes—civil or commercial—from arbitrability. Intrinsic legislative material is in fact to the
contrary. Section 8 contains a mandate that where an action is brought before a judicial authority in
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
77

a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement, the parties shall be referred by it to
arbitration, if a party to or a person claiming through a party to the arbitration agreement applies
not later than the date of submitting the first statement on the substance of the dispute. The only
exception is where the authority finds, prima facie, that there is no valid arbitration agreement.
Section 8 contains a positive mandate and obligates the judicial authority to refer parties to
arbitration in terms of the arbitration agreement. While dispensing with the element of judicial
discretion, the statute imposes an affirmative obligation on every judicial authority to hold down
parties to the terms of the agreement entered into between them to refer disputes to arbitration.
Article 8 of the UNCITRAL Model Law enabled a court to decline to refer parties to arbitration if it is
found that the arbitration agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.
Section 8 of the Act has made a departure from the UNCITRAL law which is indicative of the wide
reach and ambit of the statutory mandate. Section 8 uses the expansive expression “judicial
authority” rather than “court” and the words “unless it finds that the agreement is null and void,
inoperative and incapable of being performed” do not find place in Section 8.
21. On the 2015 amendment to Section 8, Justice Indu Malhotra, comments as under:
Section 8 was amended by the 2015 Amendment to clarify the scope of enquiry by the
judicial authority at the pre−reference stage. The court would be required to make a
prima facie determination as to whether there is valid arbitration agreement.77 We
must state that we are partly in agreement with the aforesaid, wherein the judicial
authorities have been given a clear mandate for interference at the pre−reference
stage, however, the threshold standard is worded differently, as pointed herein.
77Justice Indu Malhotra, Commentary on the Law of Arbitration, Vol. I, 4th Ed., p.
317.
22. Section 11 of the Act in its present and earlier forms, are extracted below:
Section 11 prior to Section 11 after Act Act 3 of 2016 3 of 2016 Section 11 after Act 33
of 2019 Appointment of Appointment of arbitrators.− (1) A arbitrators.—(1) A
Appointment of person of any person of any arbitrators.−(1) A nationality may be an
nationality may be an person of any arbitrator, unless arbitrator, unless nationality
may be an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by otherwise agreed by the parties.
otherwise agreed by the parties.
the parties.
(2) Subject to sub− (2) Subject to sub− (2) Subject to sub− section (6), the parties section (6), the
parties section (6), the parties are free to agree on a are free to agree on a are free to agree on a
procedure for procedure for procedure for appointing the appointing the appointing the arbitrator
or arbitrator or arbitrator or arbitrators. arbitrators.
arbitrators.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
78

                           (3)     Failing     any
(3)     Failing     any                               (3)     Failing     any
                           agreement referred to
agreement referred to                                 agreement referred to
                           in sub−section (2), in
in sub−section (2), in                                in sub−section (2), in
                           an arbitration with
an arbitration with        three arbitrators, each    an arbitration with
three arbitrators, each    party shall appoint        three arbitrators, each
party shall appoint        one arbitrator, and the    party shall appoint
one arbitrator, and        two           appointed    one arbitrator, and the
the two appointed          arbitrators        shall   two           appointed
arbitrators        shall   appoint     the    third   arbitrators        shall
appoint     the    third   arbitrator who shall       appoint     the    third
arbitrator who shall       act as the presiding       arbitrator who shall
act as the presiding       arbitrator.                act as the presiding
arbitrator.                                           arbitrator.
                           (4) If the appointment
                        procedure    in   sub−
(4) If the appointment section (3) applies and         (3A)    The     Supreme
procedure in sub− —                                    Court and the High
section (3) applies and                                Court shall have the
–                       (a) a party fails to           power to designate,
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator             arbitral    institutions,
    appoint          an within thirty days             from time to time,
    arbitrator   within from the receipt of a          which      have     been
    thirty days from request to do so from             graded by the Council
    the receipt of a the other party; or               under section 43−I, for
    request to do so
(b) the two appointed the purposes of this from the other arbitrators fail to Act:
party; or agree on the third
(b) the two appointed arbitrator within thirty Provided that in arbitrators fail to days
from the date of respect of those High agree on the third their appointment, the Court
jurisdictions, arbitrator within appointment shall be where no graded thirty days
from made, upon request of arbitral institution are the date of their a party, by the
available, then, the appointment, Supreme Court or, as the appointment Chief Justice
of the the case may be, the shall be made, concerned High Court High Court or any
upon request of a person or institution may maintain a panel party, by the Chief
designated by such of arbitrators for Justice or any Court. discharging the person or
functions and duties institution (5) Failing any of arbitral institution designated by
him. agreement referred to and any reference to in sub−section (2), in the arbitrator
shall be (5) Failing any an arbitration with a deemed to be an agreement referred to
sole arbitrator, if the arbitral institution for in sub−section (2), in parties fail to agree
on the purposes of this an arbitration with a the arbitrator within section and the sole
arbitrator, if the thirty days from arbitrator appointed parties fail to agree on receipt
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
79

of a request by by a party shall be the arbitrator within one party from the thirty days
from other party to so agree entitled to such fee at receipt of a request by the
appointment shall the rate as specified in one party from the be made, upon request
the Fourth Schedule:
other party to so agree of a party, by the the appointment shall Supreme Court or, as
Provided further that be made, upon the case may be, the the Chief Justice of the
request of a party, by High Court or any concerned High Court the Chief Justice or
person or institution may, from time to any person or designated by such time,
review the panel institution designated Court.
of arbitrators.
by him.
                          (6) Where, under an
                          appointment                  (4) If the appointment
(6) Where, under an
                          procedure         agreed     procedure     in    sub−
appointment
                          upon by the parties,—        section (3) applies and
procedure        agreed
                          (a) a party fails to act     —
upon by the parties, −
                          as required under that       (a) a party fails to
(a) a party fails to act procedure; or
                                                       appoint an arbitrator
    as required under
                                                       within thirty days
that procedure; or (b) the parties, or the
(b) the parties, or the two from the receipt of a appointed request to do so from two
appointed arbitrators, fail to arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement the other party;
or reach an expected of them agreement under that procedure; (b) the two appointed
expected of them or arbitrators fail to under that agree on the third procedure; or (c)
a person, including arbitrator within thirty
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to days from the date of an institution, fails
perform any function their appointment, to perform any entrusted to him or it
function entrusted under that procedure, the appointment shall to him or it under a
party may request be made, on an that procedure, the Supreme Court or, application
of the a party may request as the case may be, party, by the arbitral the Chief Justice
or the High Court or any institution designated any person or person or institution by
the Supreme Court, institution designated designated by such in case of international
by him to take the Court to take necessary measure, the necessary commercial unless
the agreement measure, unless the arbitration, or by the on the appointment
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
80

agreement on the High Court, in case of procedure provides appointment arbitrations
other than other means for procedure provides international securing the other
means for commercial appointment. securing the arbitration, as the appointment.
case may be.
(7) A decision on a
matter entrusted by          (6A)    The     Supreme
                             Court or, as the case  (5)     Failing       any
sub−section (4) or sub−                             agreement referred to
                             may be, the High
section (5) or sub−
                             Court,                 in sub−section (2), in
                                                while
section (6) to the Chief
                             considering         anyan arbitration with a
Justice or the person
application under sub− sole arbitrator, if the or institution section (4) or sub− parties
fail to agree on designated by him is section (5) or sub− the arbitrator within final.
section (6), shall, thirty days from notwithstanding any receipt of a request by (8) The
Chief Justice judgment, decree or or the person or one party from the order of any
Court, institution designated other party to so agree confine to the by him, in
appointing the appointment shall examination of the an arbitrator, shall existence of
be an made on an have due regard to – arbitration agreement. application of the
(a) any qualification party in accordance required of the (6B) The designation with
the provisions arbitrator by the of any person or contained in sub− agreement of the
institution by the section (4).
parties; and                 Supreme Court or, as
(b)               other      the case may be, the (6) Where, under an
considerations as are        High Court, for the appointment
likely to secure the         purposes    of    this procedure          agreed
appointment of an            section shall not be upon by the parties,—
independent        and       regarded     as      a
impartial arbitrator.        delegation of judicial
                                                    (a) a party fails to act
                             power by the Supreme
(9) In the case of Court or the High as required under that appointment of sole or
Court. procedure; or third arbitrator in an international (7) A decision on a (b) the
parties, or the commercial matter entrusted by two appointed arbitration, the Chief
sub−section (4) or sub− arbitrators, fail to Justice of India or the section (5) or sub−
reach an agreement person or institution section (6) to the expected of them
designated by him Supreme Court or, as under that procedure;
may      appoint      an   the case may be, the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
81

                           High Court or the           or
arbitrator      of     a
                           person or institution
nationality other than                                 (c) a person, including
                           designated by such
the nationalities of the
                           Court is final and no       an institution, fails to
parties    where     the
                           appeal        including     perform any function
parties    belong     to
                           Letters Patent Appeal       entrusted to him or it
different nationalities.
                           shall lie against such      under that procedure,
                           decision
(10) The Chief Justice
                                                       the appointment shall
may      make      such    (8) The Supreme Court       be made, on an
scheme as he may           or, as the case may
deem appropriate for                                   application     of   the
                           be, the High Court or
dealing with matters                                   party, by the arbitral
                           the       person      or
entrusted by sub−                                      institution designated
                           institution designated
section (4) or sub−        by such Court, before       by the Supreme Court,
section (5) or sub−        appointing            an    in case of international
section (6) to him.        arbitrator, shall seek a    commercial
                           disclosure in writing       arbitration, or by the
(11) Where more than       from the prospective        High Court, in case of
one request has been       arbitrator in terms of      arbitrations other than
made     under    sub−     sub−section      (1)   of   international
section (4) or sub−        section 12, and have        commercial
section (5) or sub−        due regard to—              arbitration, as the
section(6) to the Chief    (a) any qualifications      case may be to take
Justices of different      required      for    the    the           necessary
High Courts or their       arbitrator     by    the
                                                       measure, unless the
                           agreement       of   the
designates, the Chief                                  agreement      on    the
                           parties; and
Justice      or    his                                 appointment
                           (b) the contents of the
designate to whom the      disclosure and other       procedure    provides
request has been first     considerations as are      other    means     for
made     under    the      likely to secure the       securing          the
relevant sub−section       appointment of an          appointment.
shall     alone     be     independent         and
competent to decide        impartial arbitrator.      (6B) The designation
on the request.                                       of any person or
                           (9) In the case of
                                                      institution  by    the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
82

(12)(a)   Where     the    appointment of sole or
                           third arbitrator in an     Supreme Court or, as
matters referred to in                                the case may be, the
                           international
sub−sections (4), (5),                                High Court, for the
                           commercial
(6), (7), (8) and (10)
                           arbitration,          the  purposes    of    this
arise        in      an
                           Supreme Court or the       section shall not be
international
                           person or institution      regarded     as      a
commercial
                           designated by that         delegation of judicial
arbitration,        the    Court may appoint an       power by the Supreme
reference to “Chief        arbitrator       of     a  Court or the High
Justice” in those sub−     nationality other than     Court.
sections      shall  be    the nationalities of the
construed       as    a    parties    where      the
reference to the “Chief                              (8)     The        arbitral
                           parties     belong     to
Justice of India”                                    institution referred to
                           different nationalities.
                                                     in sub−sections (4), (5)
(b) Where the matters      (10)    The      Supreme and        (6),      before
referred to in sub−        Court or, as the case appointing                  an
sections (4), (5), (6),    may be, the High arbitrator, shall seek a
(7), (8) and (10) arise    Court, may make such disclosure in writing
in       any       other   scheme as the said from the prospective
arbitration,         the   Court     may       deem arbitrator in terms of
reference to “ Chief       appropriate for dealing sub−section         (1)    of
Justice” in those sub      with matters entrusted section 12, and have
−sections    shall    be   by sub−section (4) or due regard to—
construed      as      a   sub−section (5) or sub−
reference to the Chief     section (6), to it.
                                                     (a) any qualifications
Justice of the High                                  required       for     the
                           (11) Where more than
Court within whose
                           one request has been arbitrator           by     the
local     limits     the    made     under      sub−   agreement      of    the
principal Civil Court       section (4) or sub−        parties; and
referred to in clause       section (5) or sub−
(e) of sub−section (1) of section (6) to different (b) the contents of the section 2 is
situate High Courts or their disclosure and other and, where the High designates, the
High considerations as are Court itself is the Court or its designate likely to secure the
Court referred to in to whom the request appointment of an that clause, to the has
been first made under the relevant independent and Chief Justice of that impartial
arbitrator.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
83

sub−section shall alone High Court.
                            be competent to decide
                            on the request.            (9) In the case of
                                                       appointment of sole or
                            (12)(a)    Where     the   third arbitrator in an
                            matters referred to in     international
                            sub−sections (4), (5),     commercial
                            (6), (7), (8) and sub−     arbitration, the arbitral
section (10) arise in an institution designated international by the Supreme commercial Courtmay
appoint an arbitration, the arbitrator of a reference to the “Supreme Court or, as nationality other
than the case may be, the the nationalities of the High Court” in those parties where the sub−
sections shall be parties belong to construed as a different nationalities.
reference to the “Supreme Court”; and (11) Where more than one request has been
(b) Where the matters made under sub− referred to in sub− section (4) or sub− sections (4), (5), (6),
section (5) or sub− (7), (8) and sub−section section (6) to different (10) arise in any other arbitral
institutions, arbitration, the reference to “the the arbitral institution Supreme Court or, as to which
the request the case may be, the has been first made High Court” in those under the relevant sub−
sections shall be sub−section shall be construed as a competent to appoint.
reference to the “High
Court” within whose
                            (12) Where the matter
local     limits     the
                            referred to in sub−
principal Civil Court
referred to in clause (e) sections (4), (5), (6) of sub−section (1) of and (8) arise in an section 2 is
situate, international and where the High commercial arbitration Court itself is the or any other
Court referred to in arbitration, the that clause, to that reference to the High Court. arbitral
institution in those sub−sections (13) An application shall be construed as made under this a
reference to the section for arbitral institution appointment of an designated under sub− arbitrator
or arbitrators shall be section (3−A).
disposed of by the
Supreme Court or the        (13) An application
High Court or the           made      under     this
person or institution       section               for
designated by such          appointment of an
Court, as the case          arbitrator             or
maybe,              as      arbitrators shall be
expeditiously       as      disposed of by the
possible    and     an      arbitral     institution
endeavour shall be          within a period of
made to dispose of the
                            thirty days from the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
84

matter within a period
                            date of service of
of sixty days from the
date of service of          notice on the opposite
notice on the opposite party.
party.
                            (14)     The     arbitral
(14) For the purpose of institution             shall
determination of the determine the fees of fees of the arbitral the arbitral tribunal tribunal and the
and the manner of its manner of its payment payment to the to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court
may arbitral tribunal frame such rules as subject to the rates may be necessary, specified in the
Fourth after taking into Schedule.
consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Explanation.— For the Schedule. removal of doubts,
it is hereby clarified that Explanation.—For the this sub−section shall removal of doubts, it is not
apply to hereby clarified that international this sub−section shall commercial arbitration not apply
to and in arbitrations international commercial arbitration (other than and in arbitrations
international (other than commercial international arbitration) where commercial parties have
agreed arbitration) in case for determination of where parties have fees as per the rules of agreed for
an arbitral institution.
determination of fees as per the rules of an arbitral institution.
23. Section 12 imposes, upon a person approached to be an arbitrator, the obligation to disclose to
the parties in writing any circumstance that may give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
independence and impartiality. An arbitrator can be challenged if there are circumstances that give
rise to justifiable doubts about his independence and impartiality or if he does not possess the
qualifications agreed to by the parties, but such challenge can be made only for reasons which the
party challenging becomes aware of after the appointment has been made. Section 13 speaks of the
challenge procedure. It states that the parties are free to agree on such a procedure. Failing that, the
party who makes the challenge must within fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution of
the Arbitral Tribunal or of any of the circumstances mentioned in Section 12, send a written
statement of the reasons for the challenge to the Arbitral Tribunal. Unless the challenged arbitrator
withdraws or the other party to the arbitration agrees to the challenge, the Arbitral Tribunal shall
decide upon the challenge and if the challenge is not successful it shall continue the arbitration
proceedings and make an award.
That award can be sought to be set aside under Section 34.
24. Section 16 empowers the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction. Sub−section (1) of
Section 16 is relevant, and reads thus:
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
85

“16. (1) The Arbitral Tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on
any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement,
and for that purpose,—
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and
(b) a decision by the Arbitral Tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not
entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.”
25. Section 34 of the Act is as under:
Section 34 prior Section 34 after Section 34 after to Act 3 of 2016 Act 3 of 2016 Act 33
of 2019 Application for Application for setting aside setting aside Application for
setting aside arbitral award.− arbitral award.
arbitral award.
     (1) Recourse to a    —(1) Recourse to a
     Court against an     Court against an     (1) Recourse to a
     arbitral    award    arbitral   award     Court against an
may be made only        may be made only
by an application       by an application    arbitral     award
for setting aside       for setting aside    may be made only
such award in                                by an application
                        such award in
accordance   with                            for setting aside
                        accordance     with
sub−section    (2)                           such award in
                        sub−section (2) and
                                             accordance      with
and   sub−section       sub−section (3).     sub−section (2) and
(3).
                                             sub−section (3).
                        (2)   An    arbitral
                                             (2)    An   arbitral
(2) An arbitral         award may be set
                                             award may be set
award may be set        aside by the Court
                        only if—             aside by the Court
aside by the Court
                                             only if−−
only if –
(a)    the    party     (a)    the     party
                        making           the (a)     the    party
making          the
                        application          making           the
application
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
86

                        furnishes      proof application
furnishes     proof
                        that—                establishes on the
that−
 (i) a party was                             basis of the record
                        (i) a party was
 under        some      under          some of     the   arbitral
 incapacity, or         incapacity, or       tribunal that−−
(ii) the arbitration (ii) the arbitration (i) a party was agreement is not agreement is
not under some valid under the valid under the incapacity, or law to which the law to
which the parties have parties have (ii) the arbitration subjected it or, subjected it or,
agreement is not failing any failing any valid under the indication indication thereon,
law to which the thereon, under under the law for the time being in parties have the
law for the subjected it or, force; or time being in failing any force; or (iii) the party
indication thereon, making the under the law for
(iii) the party application was the time being in making the application was force; or
not given proper not given proper notice of the notice of the (iii) the party
appointment of appointment of an making the an arbitrator or arbitrator or of the
application was of the arbitral arbitral not given proper proceedings or proceedings
or notice of the was otherwise was otherwise appointment of an unable to present
unable to present arbitrator or of the his case; or his case; or arbitral
(iv) the arbitral proceedings or
(iv) the arbitral award deals with was otherwise award deals with a dispute not
unable to present a dispute not contemplated by his case; or contemplated by or not
falling or not falling within the terms of within the terms (iv) the arbitral the
submission to of the arbitration, or it award deals with submission to contains
decisions a dispute not arbitration, or it on matters beyond contemplated by contains
the scope of the or not falling decisions on submission to within the terms of matters
beyond arbitration: the submission to the scope of the arbitration, or it Provided that,
if contains decisions submission to the decisions on arbitration: on matters beyond
matters submitted Provided the scope of the to arbitration can that, if the submission
to be separated from decisions on arbitration:
                        those     not    so
matters
                        submitted,     only
submitted          to   that part of the       Provided that, if
arbitration     can     arbitral     award     the decisions on
be      separated       which      contains    matters submitted
from those not          decisions        on    to arbitration can
submitted, only         matters         not    be separated from
that part of the        submitted         to   those    not    so
arbitration award       arbitration may be
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
87

 which     contains                             submitted,      only
 decisions        on    set aside; or           that part of the
 matters        not                             arbitral      award
                        (v) the composition
 submitted         to                           which      contains
                        of    the    arbitral
 arbitration may                                decisions         on
                        tribunal or the
 be set aside; or                               matters          not
                        arbitral procedure
                        was        not     in   submitted          to
 (v)            the
                        accordance      with    arbitration may be
 composition      of
                        the agreement of        set aside; or
 the        arbitral    the parties, unless
 tribunal or the        such      agreement
 arbitral               was in conflict         (v) the composition
 procedure      was     with a provision of     of    the    arbitral
 not              in    this    Part    from    tribunal or the
 accordance with        which the parties
 the agreement of                               arbitral procedure
                        cannot derogate,
 the        parties,                            was        not     in
                        or, failing such
 unless        such     agreement,      was     accordance      with
 agreement was in       not in accordance       the agreement of
 conflict with a        with this Part; or      the parties, unless
 provision of this                              such      agreement
 Part from which        (b) the Court finds     was in conflict
 the         parties    that—                   with a provision of
 cannot derogate,                               this    Part    from
                    (i)   the   subject−
 or, failing such                               which the parties
                    matter     of    the
 agreement, was     dispute    is    not        cannot derogate,
 not              incapable            of       or, failing such
 accordance with    settlement        by        agreement,      was
 this Part; or      arbitration under           not in accordance
                    the law for the             with this Part; or
(b) the Court finds time being in force,
that−               or                    (b) the Court finds
 (i) the subject−                         that−−
 matter of the (ii) the arbitral
 dispute is not award           is    in
                                          (i)   the  subject−
 capable         of conflict with the matter        of    the
 settlement      by public policy of
 arbitration under                             dispute    is    not
 the law for the        India.                 capable           of
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
88

 time being in                                 settlement       by
                        Explanation 1.—
 force, or                                     arbitration under
                        For the avoidance
 (ii) the arbitral                             the law for the
                        of any doubt, it is
 award      is  in                             time being in force,
                        clarified that an
 conflict with the                             or
                        award           is    in
 public policy of
                        conflict with the
 India.                 public policy of (ii) the arbitral
                        India, only if,—         award      is     in
Explanation.−
                                                 conflict with the
Without prejudice       (i) the making of
                                                 public policy of
to the generality of    the award was
                                                 India.
sub−clause (ii) it is   induced               or
hereby declared,        affected by fraud
for the avoidance       or corruption or Explanation 1: For
of any doubt, that      was in violation of the avoidance of
an award is in          section        75     or any doubt, it is
conflict with the       section 81; or           clarified that an
public policy of                                 award      is     in
                        (ii)     it      is   in conflict with the
India     if     the
                        contravention with public policy of
making     of    the
                        the fundamental
award           was                              India, only if,−−
                        policy of Indian
induced            or   law; or
affected by fraud                                (i) the making of
or corruption or        (iii) it is in conflict the award was
was in violation of     with        the     most induced           or
section    75      or   basic notions of affected by fraud
section 81. morality or justice. or corruption or was in violation of (3) An application
Explanation 2.— section 75 or for setting aside For the avoidance section 81; or may
not be made of doubt, the test as to whether after three months there is a (ii) it is in
have elapsed from contravention with contravention with the date on which the
fundamental the fundamental the party making that application policy of Indian had
received the policy of Indian law; or arbitral award or, law shall not if a request had
entail a review on
(iii) it is in conflict been made under the merits of the with the most section 33, from
dispute.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
89

basic notions of the date on which (2A) An arbitral morality or justice.
that request had       award arising out
been disposed of       of       arbitrations Explanation 2: For
by the arbitral        other           than the avoidance of
tribunal:              international          doubt, the test as
      Provided that    commercial             to whether there is
if the Court is        arbitrations, may a            contravention
satisfied that the     also be set aside with                    the
applicant       was    by the Court, if the
                                              fundamental
prevented         by   Court finds that
                                              policy of Indian
sufficient    cause    the      award      is
from making the        vitiated by patent law           shall    not
                       illegality             entail a review on
application within
the said period of     appearing on the the merits of the
three months it        face of the award: dispute.
may entertain the
                     Provided that an         (2A) An arbitral
application within
                     award shall not be       award arising out
a further period of
                     set aside merely         of       arbitrations
thirty days, but     on the ground of
not thereafter.                               other           than
                     an       erroneous
                                              international
                     application of the
(4) On receipt of law         or     by       commercial
an       application reappreciation of        arbitrations, may
under sub−section evidence.                   also be set aside
(1),   the    Court                           by the Court, if the
may, where it is (3) An application           Court finds that
appropriate and it for setting aside          the      award      is
is so requested by may not be made            vitiated by patent
a party, adjourn after three months           illegality
the     proceedings have elapsed from         appearing on the
                     the date on which
for a period of                               face of the award:
time     determined    the party making
by it in order to      that     application   Provided that an
give the arbitral      had received the
                                              award shall not be
tribunal         an    arbitral award or,
                                              set aside merely
opportunity       to   if a request had
                                              on the ground of
                       been made under
resume          the                           an       erroneous
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
90

section 33, from
arbitral                                      application of the
                       the date on which
proceedings or to                             law      or     by
                       that request had
take such other                               reappreciation of
                       been disposed of
action as in the       by the arbitral        evidence.
opinion of arbitral    tribunal:
tribunal        will
                                            (3) An application
eliminate       the    Provided that if     for setting aside
grounds          for   the     Court     is
                                            may not be made
setting aside the      satisfied that the
                                            after three months
arbitral award.        applicant       was
                       prevented        by  have elapsed from
                       sufficient    cause  the date on which
                       from making the      the party making
                       application within   that    application
                       the said period of   had received the
                       three months it      arbitral award or,
                       may entertain the    if a request had
                       application within   been made under
                       a further period of  section 33, from
                       thirty days, but     the date on which
                       not thereafter.
                                            that request had
                       (4) On receipt of an been disposed of
                       application under by the arbitral
                       sub−section (1), the tribunal:
                       Court may, where
                       it is appropriate Provided that if
                       and     it  is    so the     Court     is
                       requested by a satisfied that the
                       party, adjourn the applicant        was
                       proceedings for a
                        prevented        by
period    of    time    sufficient    cause
determined by it in     from making the
order to give the
                        application within
arbitral    tribunal
                        the said period of
an opportunity to
                        three months it
resume            the
arbitral                may entertain the
proceedings or to       application within
take such other         a further period of
action as in the        thirty days, but
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
91

opinion of arbitral     not thereafter.
tribunal         will
eliminate         the   (4) On receipt of an
grounds for setting     application under
aside the arbitral      sub−section (1), the
award.                  Court may, where
(5) An application      it is appropriate
under this section      and     it    is    so
shall be filed by a     requested by a
party only after        party, adjourn the
issuing a prior         proceedings for a
notice to the other     period     of    time
party and such          determined by it in
application shall       order to give the
be    accompanied       arbitral     tribunal
by an affidavit by      an opportunity to
the       applicant
                        resume             the
endorsing
                        arbitral
compliance     with
                        proceedings or to
the            said
requirement.            take such other
                        action as in the
(6) An application      opinion of arbitral
under this section      tribunal          will
shall be disposed       eliminate          the
of   expeditiously,     grounds for setting
and in any event,
                                         aside the arbitral
                    within a period of   award.
                    one year from the
                    date on which the
                                         (5) An application
                    notice referred to
                                         under this section
                    in sub−section (5)
                                         shall be filed by a
                    is served upon the
                    other party.         party only after
                                         issuing a prior
                                         notice to the other
                                         party and such
                                         application shall
                                         be    accompanied
                                         by an affidavit by
                                         the       applicant
                                         endorsing
                                         compliance     with
                                         the            said
                                         requirement.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
92

                                         (6) An application
                                         under this section
                                         shall be disposed
                                         of   expeditiously,
                                         and in any event,
                                         within a period of
                                         one year from the
                                         date on which the
                                         notice referred to
                                         in sub−section (5)
                                         is served upon the
                                         other party.
The intention of the legislators to provide for Section 34 in its present form, is to have a limited
review of the award instead of a full−fledged appeal process. A party intending to object to an award,
is first required to file an application under Section 34 (1) indicating the objections along with the
copy of an award and other necessary documents, which are required as proof to satisfy grounds
provided under Section 34(2)(a) and (b) of the Act. Such complete petition is required to be filed
within the time period prescribed under Section 34 (3) of the Act, failing which the appeal is
rendered nugatory. The limitation prescribed under Section 34(3) is bound with the right to file
objections itself. The objections filed under Section 34 must be relatable to the limited grounds
provided under Section 34 (2) of the Act. It is the legislative intention to provide for numerous
limitations under Section 34 of the Act, which are required to be strictly adhered to so as to make
Indian arbitration time−bound and commercially prudent to opt for the same. Section 37 of the Act,
provides for limited appeal against the Section 34 order, as well as against certain other specified
orders.
26. It is important to observe Section 45 of the Act, which provides a judicial authority with the
power to refer parties to arbitration when Part II of the Act applies, in the following manner:
Section 45 prior Section 45 after Section 45 after to Act 3 of 2016 Act 3 of 2016 Act 33
of 2019 Power of judicial Power of judicial Power of judicial authority to refer
authority to refer authority to refer parties to parties to parties to arbitration.
arbitration. arbitration.
                           Notwithstanding        Notwithstanding
    Notwithstanding
    anything               anything               anything
    contained in Part I
    or in the Code of      contained in Part I contained in Part I
    Civil Procedure,
    1908 (5 of 1908),      or in the Code of or in the Code of
    a judicial
    authority, when        Civil     Procedure, Civil      Procedure,
    seized of an action
    in a matter in         1908 (5 of 1908), 1908 (5 of 1908),
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
93

    respect of which
    the parties have       a              judicial a          judicial
    made an
    agreement              authority,       when authority,     when
    referred to in
section 44, shall,     seized of an action seized of an action
    at the request of
    one of the parties     in   a    matter    in in   a   matter   in
    or any person
    claiming through       respect of which respect of which
    or under him,
refer the parties to the parties have the parties have made an made an arbitration,
unless it finds that the agreement agreement said agreement is null and void, referred
to in referred to in inoperative or incapable of being section 44, shall, section 44,
shall, performed.
                    at the request of      at the request of
                   one of the parties one of the parties
                   or     any     person or       any     person
                   claiming     through claiming          through
                   or     under    him, or under him, refer
                   refer the parties to the        parties        to
arbitration, unless arbitration, unless it finds that the it prima facie finds said
agreement is that the said null and void, agreement is null inoperative or and void,
incapable of being inoperative or performed.
incapable of being performed.
27. The present structure of arbitration is such that Courts are to assist and support arbitration and
leave the substantive part of adjudication to the arbitral tribunal. Some scholars have suggested that
the judicial mechanism that comports with the rule of law may be fundamentally at odds with non−
judicial/arbitral mechanism which is therefore less formal. But our understanding is that that the
rule of law is less in tension with arbitration than critics imagine, because they both aim to serve the
same goal−the pursuit of justice.
28. On a plain reading of the Act, whenever a dispute arises between parties, they are free to
approach an appropriate judicial forum to get their dispute resolved. If the parties have
contemplated an arbitration agreement, then they can approach a tribunal for getting the matter
resolved. Once they choose the non−judicial method, a party aggrieved by the award, has a chance to
approach judicial institutions under Section 34 and 37 (appeal jurisdiction), if the award is violative
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
94

of the grounds provided thereunder.
29. With this understanding, we need to have regards to certain precedents of this Court, in order to
understand the dispute. The case, which started the debate was the case of Konkan Railway Corpn.
Ltd. v. Mehul Construction Co., (2000) 7 SCC 201, wherein a Bench of three Judges of this Court,
emphasized the utility of ‘Chief Justice’ as occurring under the earlier Section 11, to come to a
conclusion that the power of appointment of an arbitrator was an administrative action. The
proposition laid down in the aforesaid case, was confirmed by a Constitution Bench of this Court in
Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P.) Ltd., (2002) 2 SCC 388. It may be
relevant to quote the following observation by this Court:
“21. It might also be that in a given case the Chief Justice or his designate may have
nominated an arbitrator although the period of thirty days had not expired. If so, the
Arbitral Tribunal would have been improperly constituted and be without
jurisdiction. It would then be open to the aggrieved party to require the Arbitral
Tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction. Section 16 provides for this. It states that the
Arbitral Tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction. That the Arbitral Tribunal may
rule “on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement” shows that the Arbitral Tribunal's authority under Section 16 is not
confined to the width of its jurisdiction, as was submitted by learned counsel for the
appellants, but goes to the very root of its jurisdiction. There would, therefore, be no
impediment in contending before the Arbitral Tribunal that it had been wrongly
constituted by reason of the fact that the Chief Justice or his designate had
nominated an arbitrator although the period of thirty days had not expired and that,
therefore, it had no jurisdiction.” (emphasis supplied)
30. Again, the aforesaid decision came to be referred to a seven− Judge Bench in SBP & Co. v. Patel
Engineering Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618, wherein majority was penned by Justice P.K. Balasubramanyan
and the minority dissent was by Justice C. K. Thakker.
31. The majority opinion, concluded that the power of reference under Section 11 is a judicial
function for the following reasons:
First, the sub−section (7) of Section 11 makes the adjudication by the Chief Justice,
final. Such final determination in usual course would be a judicial determination.
Second, the reason for delegating the power to the highest judicial authority in the
State or the Country, is to provide credibility for the process. Third, the power of a
persona designata cannot be delegated, unless such power is judicial power. Fourth,
Section 8 and 11 are complimentary and the ambit of power is the same.
Fifth, the principle of Kompetenz−Kompetenz, as enshrined under Section 16, will
come to play only if the parties approach the Arbitral Tribunal, without taking
recourse to Section 8 or 11.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
95

Sixth, it is incongruous to permit the order of the Chief Justice under Section 11(6) of
the Act being subjected to scrutiny under Article 226 of the Constitution. Seventh, the
Court on earlier instances did not concentrate on the threshold satisfaction of the
Chief Justice, before the same is referred to an arbitration. Eighth, it would be a
wasteful exercise for parties to arbitrate on the jurisdiction, only to find that tribunal
did not have sufficient jurisdiction to entertain the arbitration.
32. The minority view posits that the function of the Chief Justice was administrative rather than
judicial, for the following reasons:
First, merely because a decision adversely affects a party, cannot be the sole reason to
conclude that the function is judicial.
Second, finality of decision taken by the Chief Justice under Section 11(7) refers to
only matters such as qualification, independence and impartiality of the arbitrator.
The aforesaid does not necessarily make the determination judicial or quasi−judicial.
Third, Section 16 spells out a rule of chronological priority.
Fourth, Section 16 has a negative effect, that is, it allows the arbitrators to decide
their jurisdiction prior to the Courts stepping in post rendering of the award. Fifth,
there is a duty cast upon the Chief Justice under Section 11(6) ‘to act fairly’.
In our consideration, the aforesaid case was heavily caught in the obfuscated concept
of judicial or administrative duty, and there is scarce observation on the appropriate
standards of judicial enquiry or what aspects does the Court need to consider, while
referring a matter to arbitration.
33. In Shin−Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234, this Court decided the
ambit of Section 45 of the Act, which relates to the provision for referring parties to arbitration
under the New York Convention. While deciding the scope of Section 45 of the Act, Justice Y. K.
Sabharwal, as he then was, held in his opinion that a judicial forum seized of the mater should fully
rule on the validity and existence of the agreement, before referring the same to the arbitration. The
prima facie standard, which the Court found to be gaining popularity across the globe, could not be
applied as the statutory language of Section 45, as it existed, did not support such a standard. It may
be necessary to observe certain passage from Justice Sabharwal’s opinion:
“55. I may also deal with the contention urged on behalf of the appellant that only a
prima facie finding is required to be given on a combined reading of Sections 45, 48
and 50 from which it can be culled out that a party who has suffered an award can
always challenge the same under Section 48 on the ground that the arbitration
agreement is null and void. This read in conjunction with the right of appeal given
under Section 50 and the power of the arbitrator to rule on his own jurisdiction
clearly shows the intent of the legislature to avoid delay which would be inevitable if
it has to be a final decision and it would defeat the object of soon placing all material
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
96

before the Arbitral Tribunal. I am afraid that this cannot be accepted as the real
purpose of Section 48 is to ensure that at some stage whether pre−award, post−award
or both, a judicial authority must decide the validity, operation, capability of
performance of the arbitration agreement. In various cases the parties may not resort
to Section 45 in the first place, and to overcome such eventuality, the legislature has
enacted Section 48(1)(a). In other words, if the court is not asked to satisfy itself as to
the validity of the agreement at a pre−award stage (Section 45), then by virtue of
Section 48, it is given another opportunity to do so. Apart from this, under Section
48, the court may refuse to enforce the foreign award on the ground other than the
invalidity of the arbitration agreement. As far as the question of Section 50 is
concerned, it is well settled in law that an appeal is a creature of statute (M.
Ramnarain (P) Ltd. v. State Trading Corpn. of India Ltd. [(1983) 3 SCC 75] ) and a
right to appeal inheres in no one. (Gujarat Agro Industries Co. Ltd. v. Municipal
Corpn. of the City of Ahmedabad [(1999) 4 SCC 468]). The legislature under Section
50 has clearly allowed appeal only in case the judicial authority refuses to refer the
parties to arbitration or refuses to enforce the foreign award. The fact that a provision
is not made for an appeal in case reference is made to arbitration is not a ground to
say that the court should prima facie decide the validity of the agreement ignoring the
express provisions of Section 45. The legislature has granted the right of appeal in the
event of refusal to refer but not in the event of order being made for reference of the
parties to arbitration. This provision for appeal is not determinative of the scope of
Section 45 to mean that the determination thereunder has to be only prima facie.”
Justice B. N. Srikrishna, on the other hand, held that the language of Section 8 and
45 are different, wherein the judicial authority is empowered under Section 45 to
refuse reference to arbitration, if it finds that the agreement is ‘null and void,
inoperative or incapable of being performed’. He further held that ex visceribus
interpretation of the Section 45 clearly points to a prima facie view. Justice
Dharmadhikari, for different reasons, agreed with the reasoning of Justice B. N.
Srikrishna, in the following manner:
“111. With utmost respect to both of them, I am inclined to agree with the view
expressed by learned Brother Srikrishna, J. but only with a rider and a partly
different reason which may I state below:
The main issue is regarding the scope of power of any judicial authority including a
regular civil court under Section 45 of the Act in making or refusing a reference of
dispute arising from an international arbitration agreement governed by the
provisions contained in Part III Chapter I of the Act of 1996. I respectfully agree with
learned Brother Srikrishna, J. only to the extent that if on a prima facie examination
of the documents and material on record including the arbitration agreement on
which request for reference is made by one of the parties, the judicial authority or the
court decides to make a reference, it may merely mention the submissions and
contentions of the parties and summarily decide the objection if any raised on the
alleged nullity, voidness, inoperativeness or incapability of the arbitration agreement.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
97

In case, however, on a prima facie view of the matter, which is required to be
objectively taken on the basis of material and evidence produced by the parties on the
record of the case, the judicial authority including a regular civil court, is inclined to
reject the request for reference on the ground that the agreement is “null and void” or
“inoperative” or “incapable of being performed” within the meaning of Section 45 of
the Act, the judicial authority or the court must afford full opportunities to the parties
to lead whatever documentary or oral evidence they want to lead and then decide the
question like trial of a preliminary issue on jurisdiction or limitation in a regular civil
suit and pass an elaborate reasoned order. Where a judicial authority or the court
refuses to make a reference on the grounds available under Section 45 of the Act, it is
necessary for the judicial authority or the court which is seized of the matter to pass a
reasoned order as the same is subject to appeal to the appellate court under Section
50(1)(a) of the Act and further appeal to this Court under sub−section (2) of the said
section.”
34. In Shree Ram Mills Ltd. v. Utility Premises (P) Ltd., (2007) 4 SCC 599, while
observing the scope of the Court under Section 11 (6), the Court held as under:
“27……..A glance on this para would suggest the scope of the order under Section 11 to
be passed by the Chief Justice or his designate. Insofar as the issues regarding
territorial jurisdiction and the existence of the arbitration agreement are concerned,
the Chief Justice or his designate has to decide those issues because otherwise the
arbitration can never proceed. Thus, the Chief Justice has to decide about the
territorial jurisdiction and also whether there exists an arbitration agreement
between the parties and whether such party has approached the court for
appointment of the arbitrator. The Chief Justice has to examine as to whether the
claim is a dead one or in the sense whether the parties have already concluded the
transaction and have recorded satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or
whether the parties concerned have recorded their satisfaction regarding the
financial claims. In examining this if the parties have recorded their satisfaction
regarding the financial claims, there will be no question of any issue remaining. It is
in this sense that the Chief Justice has to examine as to whether there remains
anything to be decided between the parties in respect of the agreement and whether
the parties are still at issue on any such matter. If the Chief Justice does not, in the
strict sense, decide the issue, in that event it is for him to locate such issue and record
his satisfaction that such issue exists between the parties. It is only in that sense that
the finding on a live issue is given. Even at the cost of repetition we must state that it
is only for the purpose of finding out whether the arbitral procedure has to be started
that the Chief Justice has to record satisfaction that there remains a live issue in
between the parties. The same thing is about the limitation which is always a mixed
question of law and fact. The Chief Justice only has to record his satisfaction that
prima facie the issue has not become dead by the lapse of time or that any party to
the agreement has not slept over its rights beyond the time permitted by law to
agitate those issues covered by the agreement. It is for this reason that it was pointed
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
98

out in the above para that it would be appropriate sometimes to leave the question
regarding the live claim to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal. All that he has to do is
to record his satisfaction that the parties have not closed their rights and the matter
has not been barred by limitation. Thus, where the Chief Justice comes to a finding
that there exists a live issue, then naturally this finding would include a finding that
the respective claims of the parties have not become barred by limitation.”
35. The next jurisprudential jump was provided by National Insurance Company
Limited v. Boghara Polyfab Private Limited, (2009) 1 SCC 267, wherein this Court
observed as under:
“19. In SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. [(2005) 8 SCC 618] , a seven−Judge Bench of
this Court considered the scope of Section 11 of the Act and held that the scheme of
Section 11 of the Act required the Chief Justice or his designate to decide whether
there is an arbitration agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act before exercising his
power under Section 11(6) of the Act and its implications. … This Court held: (SCC
pp. 660−61 & 663, paras 39 & 47) “39.… He has to decide whether there is an
arbitration agreement, as defined in the Act and whether the person who has made
the request before him, is a party to such an agreement. It is necessary to indicate
that he can also decide the question whether the claim was a dead one; or a long−
barred claim that was sought to be resurrected and whether the parties have
concluded the transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual rights and
obligations or by receiving the final payment without objection. … For the purpose of
taking a decision on these aspects, the Chief Justice can either proceed on the basis of
affidavits and the documents produced or take such evidence or get such evidence
recorded, as may be necessary. … (emphasis supplied) …
22. Where the intervention of the court is sought for appointment of an Arbitral
Tribunal under Section 11, the duty of the Chief Justice or his designate is defined in
SBP & Co. [(2005) 8 SCC 618] This Court identified and segregated the preliminary
issues that may arise for consideration in an application under Section 11 of the Act
into three categories, that is, (i) issues which the Chief Justice or his designate is
bound to decide; (ii) issues which he can also decide, that is, issues which he may
choose to decide; and (iii) issues which should be left to the Arbitral Tribunal to
decide.
22.1. The issues (first category) which the Chief Justice/his designate will have to
decide are:
(a) Whether the party making the application has approached the appropriate High
Court.
(b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and whether the party who has applied
under Section 11 of the Act, is a party to such an agreement.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
99

22.2. The issues (second category) which the Chief Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or
leave them to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are:
(a) Whether the claim is a dead (long−barred) claim or a live claim.
(b) Whether the parties have concluded the contract/transaction by recording
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final payment
without objection.
22.3. The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his designate should leave exclusively to
the Arbitral Tribunal are:
(i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration clause (as for example, a matter
which is reserved for final decision of a departmental authority and excepted or
excluded from arbitration).
(ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration.
23. It is clear from the scheme of the Act as explained by this Court in SBP & Co. [(2005) 8 SCC 618]
, that in regard to issues falling under the second category, if raised in any application under Section
11 of the Act, the Chief Justice/his designate may decide them, if necessary, by taking evidence.
Alternatively, he may leave those issues open with a direction to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the
same. If the Chief Justice or his designate chooses to examine the issue and decides it, the Arbitral
Tribunal cannot re−examine the same issue. The Chief Justice/his designate will, in choosing
whether he will decide such issue or leave it to the Arbitral Tribunal, be guided by the object of the
Act (that is expediting the arbitration process with minimum judicial intervention). Where
allegations of forgery/fabrication are made in regard to the document recording discharge of
contract by full and final settlement, it would be appropriate if the Chief Justice/his designate
decides the issue.” (emphasis supplied)
36. In Chloro Controls India Private Ltd. v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc., (2013) 1 SCC 641,
this Court had to expound the scope of Section 45 in a multi−party arbitration. The Court held as
under:
“84. The issue of whether the courts are empowered to review the existence and
validity of the arbitration agreement prior to reference is more controversial. A
majority of the countries admit to the positive effect of kompetenzkompetenz
principle, which requires that the Arbitral Tribunal must exercise jurisdiction over
the dispute under the arbitration agreement. Thus, challenge to the existence or
validity of the arbitration agreement will not prevent the Arbitral Tribunal from
proceeding with hearing and ruling upon its jurisdiction. If it retains jurisdiction,
making of an award on the substance of the dispute would be permissible without
waiting for the outcome of any court action aimed at deciding the issue of the
jurisdiction. The negative effect of the kompetenzkompetenz principle is that
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
100

arbitrators are entitled to be the first to determine their jurisdiction which is later
reviewable by the court, when there is action to enforce or set aside the arbitral
award. Where the dispute is not before an Arbitral Tribunal, the court must also
decline jurisdiction unless the arbitration agreement is patently void, inoperative or
incapable of being performed.” (emphasis supplied)
37. In Arasmeta Captive Power Company Private Limited v. Lafarge India Pvt. Ltd., (2013) 15 SCC
414, this Court had to answer the issue concerning the conflict between Chloro Controls Case
(supra) and SBP Case (supra), which the Court formulated in the following manner:
“2. We have commenced our opinion with the aforesaid exposition of law as
arguments have been canvassed by Mr Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Counsel for the
appellants, with innovative intellectual animation how a three−Judge Bench in
Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc., (2013) 1 SCC
641 has inappositely and incorrectly understood the principles stated in the major
part of the decision rendered by a larger Bench in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg.
Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618 and, in resistance, Mr Harish Salve and Dr A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior
Counsel for the respondent, while defending the view expressed later by the three−Judge Bench,
have laid immense emphasis on consistency and certainty of law that garner public confidence,
especially in the field of arbitration, regard being had to the globalisation of economy and stability of
the jurisprudential concepts and pragmatic process of arbitration that sparkles the soul of
commercial progress. We make it clear that we are not writing the grammar of arbitration but
indubitably we intend, and we shall, in course of our delineation, endeavour to clear the maze, so
that certainty remains “A Definite” and finality is “Final”.” The Court answering the question,
answered thus:
“40. From the aforesaid authorities it is luculent that the larger Bench in SBP [SBP &
Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] , after deliberating at length with regard to
the role of the Chief Justice or his designate, while dealing with an application under
Section 11(6) of the Act, has thought it appropriate to define what it precisely meant
in para 39 of the judgment. The majority, if we allow ourselves to say so, was
absolutely conscious that it required to be so stated and hence, it did so. The
deliberation was required to be made as the decision in Konkan Railway Corpn.
Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P) Ltd. [(2002) 2 SCC 388] where the Constitution Bench
had held that an order passed by the Chief Justice under Section 11(6) is an
administrative order and not a judicial one and, in that context, the Bench in many a
paragraph proceeded to state about the role of the Chief Justice or his designate. The
phrases which have been emphasised by Mr Ranjit Kumar, it can be irrefragably
stated, they cannot be brought to the eminence of ratio decidendi of the judgment.
The stress laid thereon may be innovative but when the learned Judges themselves
have culled out the ratio decidendi in para 39, it is extremely difficult to state that the
principle stated in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] requires the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
101

Chief Justice or his designate to decide the controversy when raised pertaining to
arbitrability of the disputes. Or to express an opinion on excepted matters. Such an
inference by syllogistic process is likely to usher in catastrophe in jurisprudence
developed in this field. We are disposed to think so as it is not apposite to pick up a
line from here and there from the judgment or to choose one observation from here
or there for raising it to the status of “the ratio decidendi”. That is most likely to pave
one on the path of danger and it is to be scrupulously avoided. The propositions set
out in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] , in our opinion, have
been correctly understood by the two−Judge Bench in Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd.
[National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267] and the
same have been appositely approved by the three− Judge Bench in Chloro Controls
India (P) Ltd. [Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.,
(2013) 1 SCC 641] and we respectfully concur with the same. We find no substance in
the submission that the said decisions require reconsideration, for certain
observations made in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618], were
not noticed. We may hasten to add that the three−Judge Bench has been satisfied
that the ratio decidendi of the judgment in SBP [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005)
8 SCC 618] is really inhered in para 39 of the judgment.”
38. This Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port, (2017) 9 SCC 729, held as under:
(Justice Banumathi) “20…Since the dispute between the parties arose in 2016, the
amended provision of sub−section (6−A) of Section 11 shall govern the issue, as per
which the power of the Court is confined only to examine the existence of the
arbitration agreement.” (Justice Kurian Joseph) “59. The scope of the power under
Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act was considerably wide in view of the decisions in SBP
and Co. [SBP and Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] and Boghara Polyfab
[National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267]. This
position continued till the amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment,
all that the courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement exists—nothing
more, nothing less. The legislative policy and purpose is essentially to minimize the
Court's intervention at the stage of appointing the arbitrator and this intention as
incorporated in Section 11(6− A) ought to be respected.” (emphasis supplied)
39. However, in Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. v. Narbheram Power and Steel Private Limited,
(“Oriental Insurance”) (2018) 6 SCC 534, a three−Judge Bench of this Court, following the decision
in Vulcan Insurance v. Maharaj Singh, (1976) 1 SCC 943, dismissed an application under Section 11
of the Act after examining the arbitrability of the dispute. It may be noted that the Court did not
answer the question as to the power of the Court under Section 11 of the Act in this case.
40. Similarly, in United India Insurance Company Limited v. Hyundai Engineering and
Construction Company Limited, (“Hyundai Engineering”) (2018) 17 SCC 607, the Court examined
the arbitrability of the dispute as well as whether the dispute fell within the ambit of an excepted
matter by placing heavy reliance on the decision in Oriental Insurance (supra). These two cases are,
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
102

by necessary, implication to be restricted to the facts and circumstances of the case.
41. Further, in United India Insurance Company Limited v. Antique Art Exports Private Limited
(“Antique Arts”), (2019) 5 SCC 362, this Court, in a proceeding under Section 11 of the Act,
distinguished the holding in Duro Felguera (supra) on the grounds that the same was a mere general
observation about the effect of the amended provisions and that the said decision was
distinguishable on the facts of the case. The Court held that the power under Section 11 with the
Chief Justice/ his designates is a judicial power and not an administrative function, therefore
leaving some degree of judicial intervention. The Court went on to hold that when it comes to
examining the prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement, it is always necessary to ensure
that the dispute resolution process does not become unnecessarily protracted. On this basis, the
Court, in a proceeding under Section 11 of the Act, analyzed the effect of the execution of a discharge
voucher and the settlement of the claim by accord and satisfaction. On finding the claim to have
been settled by accord and satisfaction, the Court held that there was no dispute under the
agreement to be referred to an arbitrator for adjudication.
42. In Mayavati Trading Pvt. Ltd. v. Pradyuat Deb Burman, (2019) 8 SCC 714, a Bench of three
Judges, while overruling the Antique Arts Case (supra), held as under:
“10. This being the position, it is clear that the law prior to the 2015 Amendment that
has been laid down by this Court, which would have included going into whether
accord and satisfaction has taken place, has now been legislatively overruled. This
being the position, it is difficult to agree with the reasoning contained in the aforesaid
judgment [United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd., (2019) 5
SCC 362] , as Section 11(6−A) is confined to the examination of the existence of an
arbitration agreement and is to be understood in the narrow sense as has been laid
down in the judgment in Duro Felguera, SA [Duro Felguera, SA v. Gangavaram Port
Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729] — see paras 48 & 59 [Ed.: The said paras 48 & 59 of Duro
Felguera, SA v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729, for ready reference, read as
follows:“48. Section 11(6−A) added by the 2015 Amendment, reads as follows:“11. (6−
A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while considering any
application under sub−section (4) or sub− section (5) or sub−section (6), shall,
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, confine to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.”(emphasis supplied)From
a reading of Section 11(6−A), the intention of the legislature is crystal clear i.e. the
court should and need only look into one aspect— the existence of an arbitration
agreement.
What are the factors for deciding as to whether there is an arbitration agreement is the next
question. The resolution to that is simple—it needs to be seen if the agreement contains a clause
which provides for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the parties to
the agreement.***59. The scope of the power under Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act was considerably
wide in view of the decisions in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618 and National
Insurance Co.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
103

Ltd. v. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC
267. This position continued till the amendment brought about in 2015. After the amendment, all
that the courts need to see is whether an arbitration agreement exists— nothing more, nothing less.
The legislative policy and purpose is essentially to minimise the Court's intervention at the stage of
appointing the arbitrator and this intention as incorporated in Section 11(6−A) ought to be
respected.”].
11. We, therefore, overrule the judgment in Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd. [United India Insurance Co.
Ltd. v. Antique Art Exports (P) Ltd., (2019) 5 SCC 362] as not having laid down the correct law but
dismiss this appeal for the reason given in para 3 above.”
43. From the study of the precedents, the following propositions, concerning Section 11 of the Act,
are clear and binding:
1. Reference power under Section 11 of the Act is judicial and not administrative.
2. There was a wide discretion for judicial interference at the stage of reference under
Section 11 of the Act, prior to the Arbitration Amendment Act of 2015.
3. Amendment in 2015 was brought into force to limit the power of judicial
interference under Section 11 of the Act.
44. Having observed the precedents holding the field in respect of Section 11, we now come to an
analysis of Section 8. Section 8 of the Act applies, when a matter is brought by one of the parties
before the Court, and the other party brings to the notice of the Court of existence of such
arbitration agreement. Under these circumstances, the Court is obligated to refer a matter to
arbitration, on satisfaction that a valid arbitration agreement exists between the parties. The 2015
amendment clarified that the test to be utilized by the Court is on a prima facie basis.
45. The primary reason for the same, is the negative effect of Kompetenz Kompetenz under Section
16, which mandates that the arbitral tribunal is required to first look into any objections as to the
jurisdiction of the tribunal itself. It is due to the fact that parties may abuse and protract the
proceedings if there is no gatekeeping mechanism, that the legislature has found a balance, wherein
the Court is required to examine the validity of an arbitration agreement on a prima facie basis.
46. In this context, we need to examine the meaning of ‘validity of arbitration agreement’ as
occurring under Section 8 of the Act. There is no doubt that ‘validity’ to be examined under Section
8(2) of the Act, could be interpreted to mean formal validity as expressed under Section 7 of the Act.
Such an interpretation would operate as a full application of the negative facet of Section 16, as the
jurisdiction of the Court to step−in at the −reference stage would be limited. However, the burden of
the precedents stops us from accepting such a narrow interpretation.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
104

47. This brings us to the issue whether the issue of ‘arbitrability’ can be analyzed by the Courts
under Section 8 or 11 of the Act?
48. There is no doubt that ‘arbitrability’ has acquired various meaning around the world. In this
context, this Court is required to first identify the various meaning for the aforesaid term, in order to
recognize its meaning in the Indian context. Outside the United States of America, the term
“arbitrability” has a reasonably precise and limited meaning, relating to whether specific classes of
disputes are barred from arbitration because of national legislation or judicial authority. In the
United States of America, arbitrability also refers to the complicated balance between courts and
arbitrators regarding who should be the initial decision−maker on issues such as the validity of the
arbitration agreement. Out of the two meanings, we subscribe to the international flavor, which is
one of the cherished legislative intentions, i.e., to bring the arbitration act in tune with the global
march. Having ascertained the meaning of arbitrability, we need to analyze whether arbitrability
could be determined by the Court at the reference stage.
49. No doubt, arbitrability finds a close nexus with the validity of the arbitration agreement, yet we
need to observe the unique nature of the arbitration agreement, which is a bundle of contractual and
jurisdictional elements. Even if a Tribunal comes to an understanding that there exists a valid
arbitration agreement, still it does not mean that certain subject matters are arbitrable per se. This
distinction is required to be kept in mind.
50. Section 34 (2)(b) provides the statutory basis for objecting that an award which may not be
capable of being settled by arbitration, or is against the public policy of India. The legislative
intention of not arbitrating issues of public policy are intertwined with the fact that monopolies of
the State activities should not be subject matter of a private tribunal, as the concerns of the State
cannot not be dealt effectively. Further, an award, which has an erga omnes effect on third parties,
would not be in tune with the contractual nature of arbitration, which is binding on the consenting
parties alone. However, this feature alone, does not explicitly mandate that the tribunal cannot first
adjudicate a claim based on the public policy argument.
51. It is to be noted that whether a subject matter can or cannot be arbitrated should necessarily be
dealt on a case to case basis, rather than a having a bold exposition that certain subject matters are
incapable of arbitration. This case is one such example of over−broad ratio, expounded by this Court
by laying that certain subject areas cannot be arbitrated per se. At this juncture, we may observe the
case of The London Steamship Owners’ Mutual Insurance Association Ltd v The Kingdom of Spain
and The French State, [2015] EWCA Civ 333. The case relates to an oil spill off the coast of Spain
and France from a vessel named ‘The Prestige’, which resulted in the Government of Spain and
France taking action against the Captain of the ship and other officers under the Spanish Criminal
Code, as well as instituting a case against the Owner to pay punitive damages under the Spanish
Penal Code. It may be noted that the claim was also brought against the insurer of the ship for
indemnity. Those claims were based both on the insurer's obligation to indemnify the owners
against their obligations under the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
Damage and on its obligation to indemnify them against their independent liability for the tortious
acts of the master, chief officer and chief engineer. The insurers took pre−emptive action by
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
105

commencing arbitral proceedings for declaratory relief: a declaration that France and Spain were
bound by the arbitration clause provided in the insurers’ rules and that the insurers were not liable
under the underlying contract. The relief sought was granted in favour of the insurers in the form of
arbitral awards. The insurers attempted to enforce the arbitral awards in England before the
judgment was rendered in the Spanish legal proceedings. France and Spain opposed this
enforcement of the arbitral awards on various grounds. One such reason, which was raised on behalf
of Spain, was that the matter was incapable of being resolved by arbitration. The Court while
dismissing the aforesaid objection, held that:
In my view this passage amounts to a finding that a conviction is not an integral
element of the cause of action. The distinction is important, because even if a
conviction were a pre−condition to the right to recover against the insurer, there
would be no reason why an arbitrator should not determine a claim of this kind,
taking into account whether the condition has or has not been satisfied. He cannot,
on the other hand, formally convict any person of a criminal offence.
This Court does recognize the jurisdictional differences and uniqueness between
England and India, while placing reliance on the same. However, the important
aspect is that the plea of public policy is required to be specifically identified, pleaded
and shown with respect to how the award is contrary to the public policy. It may be
possible that there may be certain claims abutting a restricted sphere, which may not
be specifically hit by public policy or have erga omnes effect. If that be so, it would be
too early at the stage of reference to determine the same as it would require complete
examination of the issue at hand, which is more suited to be first dealt by the
Tribunal and thereafter be looked into at the stage of enforcement.
52. To this extent, even this Court in Avitel Post Studioz Limited v. HSBC PI Holdings (Mauritius)
Limited, Civil Appeal No. 5145 of 2016 has held as under:
“16. In the light of the aforesaid judgments, paragraph 27(vi) of Afcons [Afcons
Infrastructure Ltd. v. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) Ltd., (2010) 8 SCC 24]
and paragraph 36(i) of Booz Allen [Booz Allen & Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance
Ltd., (2011)5 SCC 532, must now be read subject to the rider that the same set of facts
may lead to civil andcriminal proceedings and if it is clear that a civil dispute
involvesquestions of fraud, misrepresentation, etc. which can be the subject matter of
such proceeding under section 17 of the Contract Act, and/orthe tort of deceit, the
mere fact that criminal proceedings can or have been instituted in respect of the same
subject matter would not lead to the conclusion that a dispute which is otherwise
arbitrable, ceases to be so.”
53. It is important to note that various countries have already allowed inter−partes arbitration with
respect to in rem rights concerning intellectual property etc., through a statutory framework. It is
worthwhile to study the feasibility of the same, if we want to provide impetus to arbitration.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
106

54. On a different note, we need to keep in mind that an arbitration agreement would, as a necessary
implication, carry with it a presumption of a one−stop mechanism. When parties decide to enter
into an arbitration agreement, they agree to take all their disputes before arbitration. This
presumption, is a rebuttable presumption. Therefore, Section 8 and 11 has to be interpreted with
sufficient strictness, wherein the jurisdiction of the Court to decide issues should be limited to those
expressly provided by the law.
55. This Court has dealt with various judgments on the issue of arbitrability, which are required to
be discussed at this point. The first case is of Booz Allen and Hamilton Inc. v. SBI Home Finance
Ltd., (2011) 5 SCC 532, wherein a Division Bench dealt with the ambit of Section 8 and 11 (prior to
amendment), qua subject matter arbitrability. This Court observed as under:
“32. The nature and scope of issues arising for consideration in an application under
Section 11 of the Act for appointment of arbitrators, are far narrower than those
arising in an application under Section 8 of the Act, seeking reference of the parties
to a suit to arbitration. While considering an application under Section 11 of the Act,
the Chief Justice or his designate would not embark upon an examination of the issue
of “arbitrability” or appropriateness of adjudication by a private forum, once he finds
that there was an arbitration agreement between or among the parties, and would
leave the issue of arbitrability for the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal. If the
arbitrator wrongly holds that the dispute is arbitrable, the aggrieved party will have
to challenge the award by filing an application under Section 34 of the Act, relying
upon sub−section (2)(b)(i) of that section.” The Court was cognizant of the fact that
prior to the 2015 amendment, Section 11 posits a limited jurisdiction for the Courts to
deal with, in comparison to Section 8, which occurs at a different stage. In this
context, it is relevant to quote paragraphs 33 and 36, which reads as under:
33. But where the issue of “arbitrability” arises in the context of an application under
Section 8 of the Act in a pending suit, all aspects of arbitrability will have to be
decided by the court seized of the suit, and cannot be left to the decision of the
arbitrator. Even if there is an arbitration agreement between the parties, and even if
the dispute is covered by the arbitration agreement, the court where the civil suit is
pending, will refuse an application under Section 8 of the Act, to refer the parties to
arbitration, if the subject−matter of the suit is capable of adjudication only by a
public forum or the relief claimed can only be granted by a special court or Tribunal.
XXXXXX
36. The well−recognised examples of non− arbitrable disputes are: (i) disputes relating to rights and
liabilities which give rise to or arise out of criminal offences;
(ii) matrimonial disputes relating to divorce, judicial separation, restitution of conjugal rights, child
custody; (iii) guardianship matters; (iv) insolvency and winding−up matters; (v) testamentary
matters (grant of probate, letters of administration and succession certificate); and (vi) eviction or
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
107

tenancy matters governed by special statutes where the tenant enjoys statutory protection against
eviction and only the specified courts are conferred jurisdiction to grant eviction or decide the
disputes.
The Court came to the aforesaid conclusion, of ascertaining certain subject matters as non−
arbitrable, on two main reasons, (1.) that certain matters are excluded for examination by a private
forum; (2) that in rem rights cannot be arbitrated.
56. In A. Ayysamy v. A. Paramsivam, (2016) 10 SCC 386, this Court had to deal with an issue
concerning the arbitrability of fraud under the Act, prior to the 2015 amendment. The Court by two
separate opinions delivered by Justice A. K. Sikri and Dr. D. Y. Chandrachud, has recognized that
the Court at the reference stage, could classify a matter and accordingly refer a matter to arbitration
which does not have serious allegations of fraud.
57. In Emaar MGF Land Limited v. Aftab Singh, (2019) 12 SCC 751, this Court held that Consumer
Protection Act cases are not arbitrable. On a perusal of the judgment, no doubt reliance was placed
on the Booz Allen Case (supra) and there is some discussion on the scope of Section 8 of the
Arbitration Act. However, the thrust of the reasoning is not on the question of arbitrability, rather it
was on the fact that the Consumer Protection Act, had an implied bar for referring a matter to
arbitration, being a special legislation. The difference is subtle, yet it is required to be recognized
that the Consumer Protection Act, impliedly barred the application of the Arbitration Act.
58. From a study of the above precedents, the following conclusion, with respect to adjudication of
subject−matter arbitrability under Section 8 or 11 of the Act, are pertinent:
a) In line with the categories laid down by the earlier judgment of Boghara Polyfab
(supra), the Courts were examining ‘subject−matter arbitrability’ at the pre−arbitral
stage, prior to the 2015 amendment.
b) Post the 2015 amendment, judicial interference at the reference stage has been
substantially curtailed.
c) Although subject matter arbitrability and public policy objections are provided
separately under Section 34 of the Act, the Courts herein have understood the same
to be interchangeable under the Act. Further, subject matter arbitrability is inter−
linked with in−rem rights.
d) There are special classes of rights and privileges, which enure to the benefit of a
citizen, by virtue of constitutional or legislative instrument, which may affect the
arbitrability of a subject matter.
59. It may be noted that the Act itself does not exclude any category of disputes as being non−
arbitrable. However, the Courts have used the ‘public policy’ reason to restrict arbitration with
respect to certain subject matters. In line with the aforesaid proposition, the Courts have interfered
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
108

with the subject matter arbitrability at the pre−reference stage.
60. However, post the 2015 amendment, the structure of the Act was changed to bring it in tune
with the pro−arbitration approach. Under the amended provision, the Court can only give prima
facie opinion on the existence of a valid arbitration agreement. In line with the amended language
and the statutory scheme, the examination of the subject matter arbitrability may not be appropriate
at the stage of reference under Section 8 of the Arbitration Act. It is more appropriate to be taken up
by the Court at the stage of enforcement under Section 34 of the Act. Having said so, in clear cases
where the subject matter arbitrability is clearly barred, the Court can cut the deadwood to preserve
the efficacy of the arbitral process.
61. At this stage a word of caution needs to be said for arbitrators. They have been given jurisdiction
to decide on the subject matter arbitrability. They are required to identify specific public policy in
order to determine the subject matter arbitrability. Merely because a matter verges on a prohibited
territory, should not by in itself stop the arbitrator from deciding the matter. He/she should be
careful in considering the question of non−arbitrability.
62. This brings us to the question of what prima facie case means, as is required to determine the
non−existence of a valid arbitration agreement under Section 8 of the Act. The meaning and scope
of ‘prima facie’ has greatly varied in common law as well as the civil law systems. Immediately, at
least two meanings can be attributed to this term. First, it means a party is said to have established a
prima facie case when he has satisfied his burden of producing evidence. The second meaning
postulates that a party has established a prima facie case only when he has made such a strong
showing that he is entitled to a presumption in his favor. Shin−Etsu Case (supra), categorically laid
that prima facie test is to be adopted under Section 45 of the Act (prior to the 2015 amendment).
The Court was of the opinion that prima facie determination was seen as the view of Court, which
can again be gone into by the Tribunal.
63. In Antique Arts (supra) (subsequently over−ruled on a different point), this Court while
following New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Genus Power Infrastructure Ltd., (2015) 2 SCC 424 held
that that a bald plea of fraud, coercion, duress or undue influence is not enough and the party who
sets up a plea, must establish the same on a prima facie basis by placing material before the Chief
Justice/his designate. This categorically establishes that prima facie case is relatable to
establishment of initial presumption, rather than an evidentiary standard.
64. The 246th Law Commission Report, in respect of scope and nature of pre−arbitral judicial
intervention, states as under:
“28. The Act recognizes situations where the intervention of the Court is envisaged at
the pre−arbitral stage i.e. prior to the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, which
includes Sections 8, 9, 11 in the case of Part I arbitrations and Section 45 in the case
of Part II arbitrations.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
109

Sections 8, 45 and also Section 11 relating to “reference to arbitration” and
“appointment of the Tribunal”, directly affect the constitution of the Tribunal and
functioning of the arbitral proceedings. Therefore, their operation has a direct and
significant impact on the “conduct” of arbitrations. Section 9, being solely for the
purpose of securing interim relief, although having the potential to affect the rights of
parties, does not affect the “conduct” of the arbitration in the same way as these other
provisions. It is in this context the Commission has examined and deliberated the
working of these provisions and proposed certain amendments.
29. The Supreme Court has had occasion to deliberate upon the scope and nature of
permissible pre− arbitral judicial intervention, especially in the context of Section 11
of the Act.
Unfortunately, however, the question before the Supreme Court was framed in terms of whether
such a power is a “judicial” or an “administrative” power — which obfuscates the real issue
underlying such nomenclature/description as to— — the scope of such powers — i.e. the scope of
arguments which a court (Chief Justice) will consider while deciding whether to appoint an
arbitrator or not — i.e. whether the arbitration agreement exists, whether it is null and void, whether
it is voidable, etc.; and which of these it should leave for decision of the Arbitral Tribunal.
— the nature of such intervention — i.e. would the court (Chief Justice) consider the issues upon a
detailed trial and whether the same would be decided finally or be left for determination of the
Arbitral Tribunal.
30. After a series of cases culminating in the decision in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg.
Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618 , the Supreme Court held that the power to appoint an arbitrator under
Section 11 is a “judicial” power. The underlying issues in this judgment, relating to the scope of
intervention, were subsequently clarified by Raveendran, J. in National Insurance Co. Ltd. V.
Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267, …..
…..
32. In relation to the nature of intervention, the exposition of the law is to be found in the decision
of the Supreme Court in Shin−Etsu Chemical Co.
Ltd. V. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234] , (in the context of Section 45 of the Act), where the
Supreme Court has ruled in favour of looking at the issues/controversy only prima facie.
33. It is in this context, the Commission has recommended amendments to Sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of the judicial intervention is only restricted to
situations where the court/judicial authority finds that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is
null and void. Insofar as the nature of intervention is concerned, it is recommended that in the event
the court/judicial authority is prima facie satisfied against the argument challenging the arbitration
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
110

agreement, it shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer the parties to arbitration, as the case may be.
The amendment envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if
it finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is null and void. If the judicial
authority is of the opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, then it shall refer the
dispute to arbitration, and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally determined
by the Arbitral Tribunal. However, if the judicial authority concludes that the agreement does not
exist, then the conclusion will be final and not prima facie. The amendment also envisages that there
shall be a conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration agreement is null and void.
In the event that the judicial authority refers the dispute to arbitration and/or appoints an
arbitrator, under Sections 8 and 11 respectively, such a decision will be final and non−appealable.
An appeal can be maintained under Section 37 only in the event of refusal to refer parties to
arbitration, or refusal to appoint an arbitrator.” (emphasis supplied)
65. The difference of statutory language provided under the amended Section 8, which states ‘refer
the parties to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists’ in
comparison with the amended Section 11(6A), creates disparities which need to be ironed out. While
the Court in the Shin−Etsu case (supra) and the Duro Felguera case (supra) recommended for
finding a valid arbitration agreement on a prima facie basis qua Section 11, however, the negative
language used under the amended Section 8 mandates for referring a matter to arbitration unless
the Court prima facie finds that no valid arbitration exists. It is to be noted that a finding of non−
existence of arbitration agreement is final subject to the appeal process only, without further scope
for arbitration tribunal to decide anything as there can be no further reference. If that be the case,
then the usage of phrase ‘prima facie’ stands at odds with the established precedents on prima facie
standards. In this context, we can only stress on the requirement of quality legislative drafting
protocols to eliminate such complications.
66. From the aforesaid discussion, we can conclude that the respondent/defendant has to establish a
prima facie case of non−existence of valid arbitration agreement, wherein it is to be summarily
portrayed that a party is entitled to such a finding. If a party cannot satisfy the Court of the same on
the basis of documents produced, and rather requires extensive examination of oral and
documentary production, then the matter has to be necessarily referred to the Tribunal for full trial.
Such limited jurisdiction vested with the Court, is necessary at the pre−reference stage to
appropriately balance the power of the Tribunal with judicial interference.
67. The amendment to the aforesaid provision was meant to cut the dead wood in extremely limited
circumstances, wherein the respondent is able to ex−facie portray non−existence of valid arbitration
agreement, on the documents and the pleadings produced by the parties. The prima facie view,
which started its existence under Section 45 through Shin− Etsu Case (supra), has been explicitly
accommodated even under domestic arbitration by the 2015 amendment with appropriate
modifications.
68. Before we part with this aspect, it was extensively argued before us that the test for the Court is
to see whether a party is able to establish a ‘good arguable case’ for establishing the existence of the
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
111

arbitration agreement. However, the statutory language under Sections 8 and 11 emphasizes on the
threshold requirement for a party for establishing the opposite. No doubt, the aforesaid approach
may have merits. However, if the ‘good arguable case standard’ is integrated for a party requiring to
show non− existence, then the same would amount to judicial activism. Such attempts to integrate
alien formulations into the Act, which has already suffered sufficient judicial subjectivism, needs to
be dissuaded.
69. Having established the threshold standard for the Court to examine the extent of validity of the
arbitration agreement, as a starting point, it is necessary to go back to Duro Felguera (supra), which
laid down:
“48…..From a reading of Section 11(6−A), the intention of the legislature is crystal
clear i.e. the court should and need only look into one aspect—the existence of an
arbitration agreement. What are the factors for deciding as to whether there is an
arbitration agreement is the next question. The resolution to that is simple —it needs
to be seen if the agreement contains a clause which provides for arbitration
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between the parties to the agreement.”
At first blush, the Court seems to have read the existence of the arbitration agreement
by limiting the examination to an examination of its factual existence. However, that
is not so, as the existence of arbitration agreement does not mean anything unless
such agreement is contractually valid. This view is confirmed by the Duro Felguera
case (supra), wherein the reference to the contractual aspect of arbitration agreement
is ingrained under the Section 7 analysis. A mere agreement is not legally binding,
unless it satisfies the core contractual requirements, concerning consent,
consideration, legal relationship, etc. In Mayavati Trading Case (supra) and Garware
Wall Ropes Ltd. v.
Coastal Marine Construction and Engineering Ltd., [2019] 9 SCC 209, the aforesaid
stand has been confirmed.
Therefore, the scope of the Court to examine the prima facie validity of an arbitration
agreement includes only the determination of the following:
92. Whether the arbitration agreement was in writing? or
93. Whether the arbitration agreement was contained in exchange of letters,
telecommunication, etc?
94. Whether the core contractual ingredients qua the arbitration agreement were
fulfilled?
95. On rare occasions, whether the subject−matter of dispute is arbitrable?
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
112

At the cost of repetition, we note that Section 8 of the Act mandates that a matter should not be
referred to an arbitration by a court of law unless it finds that prima facie there is no valid
arbitration agreement. The negative language used in the Section is required to be taken into
consideration, while analyzing the Section. The Court should refer a matter if the validity of the
arbitration agreement cannot be determined on a prima facie basis, as laid down above. Therefore,
the rule for the Court is ‘when in doubt, do refer’.
70. Moreover, the amendment to Section 8 now rectifies the short−comings pointed out in the
Chloro Control Case (supra) with respect to domestic arbitration. Jurisdictional issues concerning
whether certain parties are bound by a particular arbitration, under group−company doctrine or
good faith, etc., in a multi−party arbitration raises complicated factual questions, which are best left
for the tribunal to handle. The amendment to Section 8 on this front also indicates the legislative
intention to further reduce the judicial interference at the stage of reference.
71. Courts, while analyzing a case under Section 8, may choose to identify the issues which require
adjudication pertaining to the validity of the arbitration agreement. If the Court cannot rule on the
invalidity of the arbitration agreement on a prima facie basis, then the Court should stop any further
analysis and simply refer all the issues to arbitration to be settled.
72. Coming to the scope of judicial interference under Section 11, the 246th Law Commission Report
noted that:
“31. The Commission is of the view that, in this context, the same test regarding scope
and nature of judicial intervention, as applicable in the context of Section 11, should
also apply to Sections 8 and 45 of the Act — since the scope and nature of judicial
intervention should not change upon whether a party (intending to defeat the
arbitration agreement) refuses to appoint an arbitrator in terms of the arbitration
agreement, or moves a proceeding before a judicial authority in the face of such an
arbitration agreement.”
73. We are cognizant of the fact that the statutory language of Section 8 and 11 are different,
however materially they do not vary and both Sections provide for limited judicial interference at
reference stage, as enunciated above.
74. In line with our holding on question no. 1, generally it would not have been appropriate for us to
delve into the second question. However, considering that a question of law has been referred to us,
we agree with the conclusions reached by our learned brother.
75. Before we part, the conclusions reached, with respect to question no. 1, are:
a. Sections 8 and 11 of the Act have the same ambit with respect to judicial
interference.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
113

b. Usually, subject matter arbitrability cannot be decided at the stage of Sections 8 or
11 of the Act, unless it’s a clear case of deadwood.
c. The Court, under Sections 8 and 11, has to refer a matter to arbitration or to
appoint an arbitrator, as the case may be, unless a party has established a prima facie
(summary findings) case of non−existence of valid arbitration agreement, by
summarily portraying a strong case that he is entitled to such a finding.
d. The Court should refer a matter if the validity of the arbitration agreement cannot
be determined on a prima facie basis, as laid down above, i.e., ‘when in doubt, do
refer’.
e. The scope of the Court to examine the prima facie validity of an arbitration
agreement includes only:
a. Whether the arbitration agreement was in writing? or b. Whether the arbitration
agreement was contained in exchange of letters, telecommunication etc? c. Whether
the core contractual ingredients qua the arbitration agreement were fulfilled? d. On
rare occasions, whether the subject−matter of dispute is arbitrable?
..............................................J. (N.V. RAMANA) NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 14, 2020.
Vidya Drolia vs Durga Trading Corporation on 14 December, 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121987320/
114
